<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Systematic Theology (Volume 3 of 3)</title>
      <title type="sub">The Doctrine of Salvation</title>
      <author><name reg="Strong, Augustus Hopkins">Augustus Hopkins Strong</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>March 31, 2014</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">45283</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2014-03-31">March 31, 2014</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Colin Bell, CCEL, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Systematic Theology</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">A Compendium and Commonplace-Book</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Designed For The Use Of Theological Students</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Augustus Hopkins Strong, D.D., LL.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">President and Professor of Biblical Theology in the Rochester Theological Seminary</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Revised and Enlarged</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">In Three Volumes</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Volume 3</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">The Doctrine of Salvation</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">The Griffith &amp; Rowland Press</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Philadelphia</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1909</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
<figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>
</div>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>The eye sees only that which it brings with it the power
of seeing.</hi></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cicero.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things
out of thy law.</hi></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Psalm 119:18.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>For with thee is the fountain of life: In thy light shall
we see light.</hi></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Psalm 36:9.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>For we know in part, and we prophesy in part; but when
that which is perfect is come, that which is in part
shall be done away.</hi></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 13:9, 10.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='777'/><anchor id='Pg777'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part VI. Soteriology, Or The Doctrine Of Salvation Through
The Work Of Christ And Of The Holy Spirit.</head>

<p>
[Transcriber's Note: This Volume begins with <q>Chapter II</q>, because <q>Chapter I</q>
of <q>Part VI</q> was printed in Volume II.]
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Reconciliation Of Man To God, Or The
Application Of Redemption Through
The Work Of The Holy Spirit.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section I.&mdash;The Application Of Christ's Redemption
In Its Preparation.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) In this Section we treat of Election and Calling; Section Second
being devoted to the Application of Christ's Redemption in its Actual
Beginning,&mdash;namely, in Union with Christ, Regeneration, Conversion, and
Justification; while Section Third has for its subject the Application of
Christ's Redemption in its Continuation,&mdash;namely, in Sanctification and
Perseverance.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The arrangement of topics, in the treatment of the reconciliation of man to God, is
taken from Julius Müller, Proof-texts, 35. <q>Revelation <emph>to</emph> us aims to bring about revelation
<emph>in</emph> us. In any being absolutely perfect, God's intercourse with us by <emph>faculty</emph>,
and by direct <emph>teaching</emph>, would absolutely coalesce, and the former be just as much
God's voice as the latter</q> (Hutton, Essays).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) In treating Election and Calling as applications of Christ's redemption,
we imply that they are, in God's decree, logically subsequent to that
redemption. In this we hold the Sublapsarian view, as distinguished from
the Supralapsarianism of Beza and other hyper-Calvinists, which regarded
the decree of individual salvation as preceding, in the order of thought, the
decree to permit the Fall. In this latter scheme, the order of decrees is
as follows: 1. the decree to save certain, and to reprobate others; 2. the
decree to create both those who are to be saved and those who are to be
reprobated; 3. the decree to permit both the former and the latter to fall;
4. the decree to provide salvation only for the former, that is, for the elect.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Richards, Theology, 302-307, shows that Calvin, while in his early work, the Institutes,
he avoided definite statements of his position with regard to the extent of the atonement,
yet in his latter works, the Commentaries, acceded to the theory of universal
atonement. Supralapsarianism is therefore hyper-Calvinistic, rather than Calvinistic.
Sublapsarianism was adopted by the Synod of Dort (1618, 1619). By Supralapsarian is
meant that form of doctrine which holds the decree of individual salvation as preceding
the decree to permit the Fall; Sublapsarian designates that form of doctrine which
holds that the decree of individual salvation is subsequent to the decree to permit the
Fall.
</p>

<pb n='778'/><anchor id='Pg778'/>

<p>
The progress in Calvin's thought may be seen by comparing some of his earlier with
his later utterances. Institutes, 2:23:5&mdash;<q>I say, with Augustine, that the Lord created
those who, as he certainly foreknew, were to go to destruction, and he did so because
he so willed.</q> But even then in the Institutes, 3:23:8, he affirms that <q>the perdition
of the wicked depends upon the divine predestination in such a manner that the cause
and matter of it are found in themselves. Man falls by the appointment of divine
providence, but he falls by his own fault.</q> God's blinding, hardening, turning the sinner
he describes as the consequence of the divine <emph>desertion</emph>, not the divine <emph>causation</emph>. The
relation of God to the origin of sin is not efficient, but permissive. In later days Calvin
wrote in his Commentary on <hi rend='italic'>1 John 2:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but
also for the whole world</hi></q>&mdash;as follows: <q>Christ suffered for the sins of the whole world, and
in the goodness of God is offered unto all men without distinction, his blood being shed
not for a part of the world only, but for the whole human race; for although in the
world nothing is found worthy of the favor of God, yet he holds out the propitiation to
the whole world, since without exception he summons all to the faith of Christ, which
is nothing else than the door unto hope.</q>
</p>

<p>
Although other passages, such as Institutes, 3:21:5, and 3:23:1, assert the harsher
view, we must give Calvin credit for modifying his doctrine with maturer reflection
and advancing years. Much that is called Calvinism would have been repudiated by
Calvin himself even at the beginning of his career, and is really the exaggeration of his
teaching by more scholastic and less religious successors. Renan calls Calvin <q>the most
Christian man of his generation.</q> Dorner describes him as <q>equally great in intellect
and character, lovely in social life, full of tender sympathy and faithfulness to his
friends, yielding and forgiving toward personal offences.</q> The device upon his seal is
a flaming heart from which is stretched forth a helping hand.
</p>

<p>
Calvin's share in the burning of Servetus must be explained by his mistaken zeal for
God's truth and by the universal belief of his time that this truth was to be defended by
the civil power. The following is the inscription on the expiatory monument which
European Calvinists raised to Servetus: <q>On October 27, 1553, died at the stake at
Champel, Michael Servetus, of Villeneuve d'Aragon, born September 29, 1511. Reverent
and grateful sons of Calvin, our great Reformer, but condemning an error which was
that of his age, and steadfastly adhering to liberty of conscience according to the true
principles of the Reformation and of the gospel, we have erected this expiatory monument,
on the 27th of October, 1903.</q>
</p>

<p>
John DeWitt, in Princeton Theol. Rev., Jan. 1904:95&mdash;<q>Take John Calvin. That
fruitful conception&mdash;more fruitful in church and state than any other conception
which has held the English speaking world&mdash;of the absolute and universal sovereignty
of the holy God, as a revolt from the conception then prevailing of the sovereignty
of the human head of an earthly church, was historically the mediator and instaurator
of his spiritual career.</q> On Calvin's theological position, see Shedd, Dogm. Theol.,
1:409, note.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) But the Scriptures teach that men as sinners, and not men irrespective
of their sins, are the objects of God's saving grace in Christ (John 15:9;
Rom. 11:5, 7; Eph. 1:4-6; 1 Pet. 1:2). Condemnation, moreover,
is an act, not of sovereignty, but of justice, and is grounded in the guilt of
the condemned (Rom. 2:6-11; 2 Thess. 1:5-10). The true order of the
decrees is therefore as follows: 1. the decree to create; 2. the decree to
permit the Fall; 3. the decree to provide a salvation in Christ sufficient for
the needs of all; 4. the decree to secure the actual acceptance of this salvation
on the part of some,&mdash;or, in other words, the decree of Election.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
That saving grace presupposes the Fall, and that men as sinners are the objects of it,
appears from <hi rend='italic'>John 15:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If ye were of the world, the world would love its own: but because ye are not of the
world, but I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 11:5-7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Even so then at this present
time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace. But if it is by grace, it is no more of works: otherwise
grace is no more grace. What then? That which Israel seeketh for, that he obtained not; but the election obtained it,
and the rest were hardened.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:4-6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we
should be holy and without blemish before him in love: having foreordained us unto adoption as sons through Jesus
Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, which he freely
bestowed on us in the Beloved</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:2</hi>&mdash;elect, <q><hi rend='italic'>according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification
of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus: Grace to you and peace be multiplied.</hi></q>
</p>

<pb n='779'/><anchor id='Pg779'/>

<p>
That condemnation is not an act of sovereignty, but of justice, appears from <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 2:6-9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who
will render to every man according to his works ... wrath and indignation ... upon every soul of
man that worketh evil</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 1:6-9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>a righteous thing with God to recompense affliction to them that afflict you
... rendering vengeance to them that know not God and to them that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus: who
shall suffer punishment.</hi></q> Particular persons are elected, not to have Christ die for them, but
to have special influences of the Spirit bestowed upon them.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Those Sublapsarians who hold to the Anselmic view of a limited
Atonement, make the decrees 3. and 4., just mentioned, exchange places,&mdash;the
decree of election thus preceding the decree to provide redemption.
The Scriptural reasons for preferring the order here given have been
already indicated in our treatment of the extent of the Atonement (pages
771-773).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
When <q>3</q> and <q>4</q> thus change places, <q>3</q> should be made to read: <q>The decree to
provide in Christ a salvation sufficient for the elect</q>; and <q>4</q> should read: <q>The decree
that a certain number should be saved,&mdash;or, in other words, the decree of Election.</q>
Sublapsarianism of the first sort may be found in Turretin, loc. 4, quæs. 9; Cunningham,
Hist. Theol., 416-439. A. J. F. Behrends: <q>The divine decree is our last word in
theology, not our first word. It represents the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus ad quem</foreign>, not the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus a quo</foreign>.
Whatever comes about in the exercise of human freedom and of divine grace&mdash;that
God has decreed.</q> Yet we must grant that Calvinism needs to be supplemented by a
more express statement of God's love for the world. Herrick Johnson: <q>Across the
Westminster Confession could justly be written: <q>The Gospel for the elect only.</q> That
Confession was written under the absolute dominion of one idea, the doctrine of predestination.
It does not contain one of three truths: God's love for a lost world;
Christ's compassion for a lost world, and the gospel universal for a lost world.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Election.</head>

<p>
Election is that eternal act of God, by which in his sovereign pleasure,
and on account of no foreseen merit in them, he chooses certain out of the
number of sinful men to be the recipients of the special grace of his Spirit,
and so to be made voluntary partakers of Christ's salvation.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Proof of the Doctrine of Election.</head>

<p>
A. From Scripture.
</p>

<p>
We here adopt the words of Dr. Hovey: <q>The Scriptures forbid us to
find the reasons for election in the moral action of man before the new
birth, and refer us merely to the sovereign will and mercy of God; that is,
they teach the doctrine of personal election.</q> Before advancing to the
proof of the doctrine itself, we may claim Scriptural warrant for three preliminary
statements (which we also quote from Dr. Hovey), namely:
</p>

<p>
First, that <q>God has a sovereign right to bestow more grace upon one
subject than upon another,&mdash;grace being unmerited favor to sinners.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 20:12-15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>These last have spent but one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us.... Friend, I do
thee no wrong.... Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 9:20, 21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, Why didst thou make me thus? Or hath not the potter a right over the clay, from the
same lump to make one part a vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor?</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Secondly, that <q>God has been pleased to exercise this right in dealing
with men.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 147:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He hath not dealt so with any nation; And as for his ordinances, they have not known them</hi></q>. <hi rend='italic'>Rom.
3:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>What advantage then hath the Jew? or what is the profit of circumcision? Much every way: first of all,
that they were intrusted with the oracles of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 15:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Ye did not choose me, but I chose you, and appointed
you, that ye should go and bear fruit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 9:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles
and kings, and the children of Israel.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thirdly, that <q>God has some other reason than that of saving as many as
possible for the way in which he distributes his grace.</q>
</p>

<pb n='780'/><anchor id='Pg780'/>

<quote rend='display'>

n<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 11:21</hi>&mdash;Tyre and Sidon <q><hi rend='italic'>would have repented,</hi></q> if they had had the grace bestowed upon
Chorazin and Bethsaida; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 9:22-25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power
known, endured with much longsuffering vessels of wrath fitted unto destruction: and that he might make known the
riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he afore prepared unto glory?</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The Scripture passages which directly or indirectly support the doctrine
of a particular election of individual men to salvation may be arranged as
follows:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Direct statements of God's purpose to save certain individuals:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Jesus speaks of God's elect, as for example in <hi rend='italic'>Mark 13:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>then shall he send forth the angels,
and shall gather together his elect</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 18:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>shall not God avenge his elect, that cry to him day and night?</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 13:48</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as many as were ordained</hi> (τεταγμένοι) <hi rend='italic'>to eternal life believed</hi></q>&mdash;here Whedon translates:
<q>disposed unto eternal life,</q> referring to κατηρτισμένα in <hi rend='italic'>verse 23</hi>, where <q><hi rend='italic'>fitted</hi></q> = <q>fitted
themselves.</q> The only instance, however, where τάσσω is used in a middle sense is in
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 16:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>set themselves</hi></q>; but there the object, ἑαυτούς, is expressed. Here we must compare
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 13:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the powers that be are ordained</hi> (τεταγμέναι) <hi rend='italic'>of God</hi></q>; see also <hi rend='italic'>Acts 10:42</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>this is he
who is ordained</hi> (ὡρισμένος) <hi rend='italic'>of God to be the Judge of the living and the dead.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 9:11-16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>for the children being not yet born, neither having done anything good or bad, that the purpose of
God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calleth.... I will have mercy upon whom I have
mercy.... So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that hath mercy</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:4, 5,
9, 11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>chose us in him before the foundation of the world,</hi> [not <emph>because</emph> we were, or were to be, holy,
but] <hi rend='italic'>that we should be holy and without blemish before him in love: having foreordained us unto adoption as sons
through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will ... the mystery of his will, according to
his good pleasure ... in whom also we were made a heritage, having been foreordained according to the purpose of him
who worketh all things after the counsel of his will</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 3:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God's elect</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 2:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God chose you
from the beginning unto salvation in sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) In connection with the declaration of God's foreknowledge of these
persons, or choice to make them objects of his special attention and care;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:27-30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>called according to his purpose. For whom he foreknew, he also foreordained to be conformed to
the image of his Son</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>elect ... according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification
of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.</hi></q> On the passage in Romans, Shedd,
in his Commentary, remarks that <q><hi rend='italic'>foreknew,</hi></q> in the Hebraistic use, <q>is more than simple
prescience, and something more also than simply <q>to fix the eye upon,</q> or to <q>select.</q>
It is this latter, but with the additional notion of a benignant and kindly feeling toward
the object.</q> In <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:27-30</hi>, Paul is emphasizing the divine sovereignty. The Christian
life is considered from the side of the divine care and ordering, and not from the side
of human choice and volition. Alexander, Theories of the Will, 87, 88&mdash;<q>If Paul is
here advocating indeterminism, it is strange that in <hi rend='italic'>chapter 9</hi> he should be at pains to
answer objections to determinism. The apostle's protest in <hi rend='italic'>chapter 9</hi> is not against predestination
and determination, but against the man who regards such a theory as
impugning the righteousness of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
That the word <q><hi rend='italic'>know,</hi></q> in Scripture, frequently means not merely to <q>apprehend intellectually,</q>
but to <q>regard with favor,</q> to <q>make an object of care,</q> is evident from
<hi rend='italic'>Gen. 18:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I have known him, to the end that he may command his children and his household after him, that they
may keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ex. 2:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And God saw the children of Israel, and God
took knowledge of them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>verse 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham,
with Isaac, and with Jacob</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 1:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For Jehovah knoweth the way of the righteous; But the way of the wicked
shall perish</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>101:4,</hi> marg.&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I will know no evil person</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Hosea 13:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I did know thee in the wilderness, in
the land of great drought. According to their pasture, so were they filled</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Nahum 1:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he knoweth them that
take refuge in him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Amos 3:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>You only have I known of all the families of the earth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 7:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>then
will I profess unto them, I never knew you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 7:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For that which I do I know not</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 8:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if
any man loveth God, the same is known by him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 4:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>now that ye have come to know God, or rather, to be
known by God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 5:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>we beseech you, brethren, to know them that labor among you, and are over you
in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them exceeding highly in love for their work's sake.</hi></q> So the word
<q>foreknow</q>: <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 11:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God did not cast off his people whom he foreknew</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:20</hi>&mdash;Christ, <q><hi rend='italic'>who
was foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Broadus on <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 7:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I never knew you</hi></q>&mdash;says; <q>Not in all the passages quoted above,
nor elsewhere, is there occasion for the oft-repeated arbitrary notion, derived from the
Fathers, that <q>know</q> conveys the additional idea of approve or regard. It denotes
acquaintance, with all its pleasures and advantages; <q><hi rend='italic'>knew,</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, as mine, as my people.</q>
</p>

<pb n='781'/><anchor id='Pg781'/>

<p>
But this last admission seems to grant what Broadus had before denied. See Thayer,
Lex. N. T., on γινώσκω: <q>With acc. of person, to recognize as worthy of intimacy and
love; so those whom God has judged worthy of the blessings of the gospel are said
ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ γινώσκεσθαι (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 8:3; Gal. 4:9</hi>); negatively in the sentence of Christ:
οὐδἐποτε ἔγνων ὑμᾶς, <q><hi rend='italic'>I never knew you,</hi></q> never had any acquaintance with you.</q> On προγινώσκω,
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:29</hi>&mdash;οὒς προέγνω, <q><hi rend='italic'>whom he foreknew,</hi></q> see Denney, in Expositor's Greek Testament,
<hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>: <q>Those whom he foreknew&mdash;in what sense? as persons who would
answer his love with love? This is at least irrelevant, and alien to Paul's general
method of thought. That salvation begins with God, and begins in eternity, are
fundamental ideas with him, which he here applies to Christians, without raising any
of the problems involved in the relation of the human will to the divine. Yet we may
be sure that προέγνω has the pregnant sense that γινώσκω often has in Scripture, <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, in
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 1:6; Amos 3:2;</hi> hence we may render: <q>those of whom God took knowledge from
eternity</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:4</hi>).</q>
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:28-30</hi>, quoted above, <q><hi rend='italic'>foreknew</hi></q> = elected&mdash;that is, made certain individuals,
in the future, the objects of his love and care; <q><hi rend='italic'>foreordained</hi></q> describes God's designation
of these same individuals to receive the special gift of salvation. In other words, <q>foreknowledge</q>
is of persons: <q>foreordination</q> is of blessings to be bestowed upon them.
Hooker, Eccl. Pol., appendix to book v. (vol. 2:751)&mdash;<q><q><hi rend='italic'>whom he did foreknow</hi></q> (know
before as his own, with determination to be forever merciful to them) <q><hi rend='italic'>he also predestinated
to be conformed to the image of his Son</hi></q>&mdash;predestinated, not to opportunity of conformation, but
to conformation itself.</q> So, for substance, Calvin, Rückert, DeWette, Stuart, Jowett,
Vaughan. On <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:1, 2,</hi> see Com. of Plumptre. The Arminian interpretation of <q><hi rend='italic'>whom
he foreknew</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:29</hi>) would require the phrase <q>as conformed to the image of his
Son</q> to be conjoined with it. Paul, however, makes conformity to Christ to be the
result, not the foreseen condition, of God's foreordination; see Commentaries of
Hodge and Lange.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) With assertions that this choice is matter of grace, or unmerited
favor, bestowed in eternity past:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:5-8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>foreordained ... according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace,
which he freely bestowed on us in the Beloved ... according to the riches of his grace</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>by grace have ye
been saved through faith; and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God</hi></q>&mdash;here <q><hi rend='italic'>and that</hi></q> (neuter τοῦτο,
<hi rend='italic'>verse 8</hi>) refers, not to <q>faith</q> but to <q>salvation.</q> But faith is elsewhere represented
as having its source in God,&mdash;see page <ref target='Pg782'>782</ref>, (<hi rend='italic'>k</hi>). <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 1:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>his own purpose and grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus before times eternal.</hi></q> Election is not because of our merit. McLaren:
<q>God's own mercy, spontaneous, undeserved, condescending, moved him. God is his
own motive. His love is not drawn out by our loveableness, but wells up, like an
artesian spring, from the depths of his nature.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) That the Father has given certain persons to the Son, to be his
peculiar possession:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 6:37</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>All that which the Father giveth me shall come unto me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>17:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that whatsoever thou hast given
him, to them he should give eternal life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I manifested thy name unto the men whom thou gavest me out of the
world: thine they were, and thou gavest them to me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou hast
given me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>unto the redemption of God's own possession</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 2:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>a people for God's own
possession.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) That the fact of believers being united thus to Christ is due wholly
to God:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 6:44</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>No man can come to me, except the Father that sent me draw him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>10:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye believe not,
because ye are not of my sheep</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>of him</hi> [God] <hi rend='italic'>are ye in Christ Jesus</hi></q> = your being, as
Christians, in union with Christ, is due wholly to God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) That those who are written in the Lamb's book of life, and they
only, shall be saved:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 4:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the rest of my fellow-workers, whose names are in the book of life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And if any
was not found written in the book of life, he was cast into the lake of fire</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>21:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>there shall in no wise enter into
it anything unclean ... but only they that are written in the Lamb's book of life</hi></q> = God's decrees of electing
grace in Christ.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='782'/><anchor id='Pg782'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) That these are allotted, as disciples, to certain of God's servants:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 17:4</hi>&mdash;(literally)&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>some of them were persuaded, and were allotted</hi> [by God] <hi rend='italic'>to Paul and Silas</hi></q>&mdash;as
disciples (so Meyer and Grimm); <hi rend='italic'>18:9, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Be not afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace: for I
am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to harm thee: for I have much people in this city.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>h</hi>) Are made the recipients of a special call of God:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:28, 30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>called according to his purpose ... whom he foreordained, them he also called</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>9:23, 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>vessels
of mercy, which he afore prepared unto glory, even us, whom he also called, not from the Jews only, but also
from the Gentiles</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>11:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>for the gifts and the calling of God are not repented of</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:24-29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>unto
them that are called ... Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.... For behold your calling, brethren,
... the things that are despised, did God choose, yea and the things that are not, that he might bring to naught the
things that are: that no flesh should glory before God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 1:15, 16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when it was the good pleasure of God, who
separated me, even from my mother's womb, and called me through his grace, to reveal his Son in me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>James 2:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and
he</hi> [Abraham] <hi rend='italic'>was called</hi> [to be] <hi rend='italic'>the friend of God</hi>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>i</hi>) Are born into God's kingdom, not by virtue of man's will, but of
God's will:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 1:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>James 1:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Of
his own will he brought us forth by the word of truth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 4:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Herein is love, not that we loved God, but
that he loved us.</hi></q> S. S. Times, Oct. 14, 1899&mdash;<q>The law of love is the expression of God's
loving nature, and it is only by our participation of the divine nature that we are
enabled to render it obedience. <q>Loving God,</q> says Bushnell, <q>is but letting God love
us.</q> So John's great saying may be rendered in the present tense: <q>not that we love
God, but that he loves us.</q> Or, as Madame Guyon sings: <q>I love my God, but with no
love of mine, For I have none to give; I love thee, Lord, but all the love is thine, For
by thy life I live</q>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>j</hi>) Receiving repentance, as the gift of God:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 5:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Him did God exalt with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and
remission of sins</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>11:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Then to the Gentiles also hath God granted repentance unto life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 2:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>correcting
them that oppose themselves; if peradventure God may give them repentance unto the knowledge of the truth.</hi></q>
Of course it is true that God might give repentance simply by inducing man to repent
by the agency of his word, his providence and his Spirit. But more than this seems to
be meant when the Psalmist prays: <q><hi rend='italic'>Create in me a clean heart, O God; And renew a right spirit within
me</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 51:10</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>k</hi>) Faith, as the gift of God:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 6:65</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>no man can come unto me, except it be given unto him of the Father</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 15:8, 9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God ...
giving them the Holy Spirit ... cleansing their hearts by faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 12:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>according as God hath dealt to each
man a measure of faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to another faith, in the same Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 5:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the fruit of the Spirit
is ... faith</hi></q> (A. V.); <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:13</hi>&mdash;In all faith, <q><hi rend='italic'>it is God who worketh in you both to will and to work, for
his good pleasure</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 6:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 3:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The Spirit breatheth where he wills, and thou</hi> [as a consequence] <hi rend='italic'>hearest his
voice</hi></q> (so Bengel); see A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 166; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>No man can say,
Jesus is Lord, but in the Holy Spirit</hi></q>&mdash;but calling Jesus <q><hi rend='italic'>Lord</hi></q> is an essential part of faith,&mdash;faith
therefore is the work of the Holy Spirit; <hi rend='italic'>Tit. 1:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the faith of God's elect</hi></q>&mdash;election is not in
consequence of faith, but faith is in consequence of election (Ellicott). If they get
their faith of themselves, then salvation is not due to grace. If God gave the faith,
then it was in his purpose, and this is election.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>l</hi>) Holiness and good works, as the gift of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2:9, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>not of works,
that no man should glory. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God afore prepared
that we should walk in them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:2</hi>&mdash;elect <q><hi rend='italic'>unto obedience.</hi></q> On Scripture testimony, see
Hovey, Manual of Theol. and Ethics, 258-261; also art. on Predestination, by Warfield,
in Hastings' Dictionary of the Bible.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
These passages furnish an abundant and conclusive refutation, on the
one hand, of the Lutheran view that election is simply God's determination
from eternity to provide an objective salvation for universal humanity;
<pb n='783'/><anchor id='Pg783'/>
and, on the other hand, of the Arminian view that election is God's determination
from eternity to save certain individuals upon the ground of
their foreseen faith.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Roughly stated, we may say that Schleiermacher elects all men subjectively;
Lutherans all men objectively; Arminians all believers; Augustinians all foreknown
as God's own. Schleiermacher held that decree logically precedes foreknowledge, and
that election is individual, not national. But he made election to include all men, the
only difference between them being that of earlier or of later conversion. Thus in
his system Calvinism and Restorationism go hand in hand. Murray, in Hastings'
Bible Dictionary, seems to take this view.
</p>

<p>
Lutheranism is the assertion that original grace preceded original sin, and that the
<hi rend='italic'>Quia Voluit</hi> of Tertullian and of Calvin was based on wisdom, in Christ. The Lutheran
holds that the believer is simply the non-resistant subject of common grace; while the
Arminian holds that the believer is the coöperant subject of common grace. Lutheranism
enters more fully than Calvinism into the nature of faith. It thinks more of the
human agency, while Calvinism thinks more of the divine purpose. It thinks more
of the church, while Calvinism thinks more of Scripture. The Arminian conception
is that God has appointed men to salvation, just as he has appointed them to condemnation,
in view of their dispositions and acts. As Justification is in view of <emph>present</emph>
faith, so the Arminian regards Election as taking place in view of <emph>future</emph> faith.
Arminianism must reject the doctrine of regeneration as well as that of election, and
must in both cases make the act of man precede the act of God.
</p>

<p>
All varieties of view may be found upon this subject among theologians. John
Milton, in his Christian Doctrine, holds that <q>there is no particular predestination or
election, but only general.... There can be no reprobation of individuals from all eternity.</q>
Archbishop Sumner: <q>Election is predestination of communities and nations
to external knowledge and to the privileges of the gospel.</q> Archbishop Whately:
<q>Election is the choice of individual men to membership in the external church and
the means of grace.</q> Gore, in Lux Mundi, 320&mdash;<q>The elect represent not the special
purpose of God for a few, but the universal purpose which under the circumstances
can only be realized through a few.</q> R. V. Foster, a Cumberland Presbyterian,
opposed to absolute predestination, says in his Systematic Theology that the divine
decree <q>is unconditional in its origin and conditional in its application.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. From Reason.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) What God does, he has eternally purposed to do. Since he bestows
special regenerating grace on some, he must have eternally purposed to
bestow it,&mdash;in other words, must have chosen them to eternal life. Thus
the doctrine of election is only a special application of the doctrine of
decrees.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The New Haven views are essentially Arminian. See Fitch, on Predestination and
Election, in Christian Spectator, 3:622&mdash;<q>God's foreknowledge of what would be the
results of his present works of grace <emph>preceded</emph> in the order of nature the purpose to
pursue those works, and presented the <emph>grounds</emph> of that purpose. Whom he foreknew&mdash;as
the people who would be guided to his kingdom by his present works of grace, in
which result lay the whole objective motive for undertaking those works&mdash;he did also,
by resolving on those works, predestinate.</q> Here God is very erroneously said to
<emph>foreknow</emph> what is as yet included in a merely <emph>possible</emph> plan. As we have seen in our discussion
of Decrees, there can be no foreknowledge, unless there is something fixed, in
the future, to be foreknown; and this fixity can be due only to God's predetermination.
So, in the present case, election must precede prescience.
</p>

<p>
The New Haven views are also given in N. W. Taylor, Revealed Theology, 373-444;
for criticism upon them, see Tyler, Letters on New Haven Theology, 172-180. If God
desired the salvation of Judas as much as of Peter, how was Peter elected in distinction
from Judas? To the question, <q><hi rend='italic'>Who made thee to differ?</hi></q> the answer must be, <q>Not
God, but my own will.</q> See Finney, in Bib. Sac., 1877:711&mdash;<q>God must have foreknown
whom he <emph>could</emph> wisely save, prior in the order of nature to his determining to
save them. But his knowing who <emph>would</emph> be saved, must have been, in the order of
nature, subsequent to his election or determination to save them, and dependent upon
<pb n='784'/><anchor id='Pg784'/>
that determination.</q> Foster, Christian Life and Theology, 70&mdash;<q>The doctrine of election
is the consistent formulation, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sub specie eternitatis</foreign>, of prevenient grace.... 86&mdash;With
the doctrine of prevenient grace, the evangelical doctrine stands or falls.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) This purpose cannot be conditioned upon any merit or faith of
those who are chosen, since there is no such merit,&mdash;faith itself being
God's gift and foreordained by him. Since man's faith is foreseen only
as the result of God's work of grace, election proceeds rather upon foreseen
unbelief. Faith, as the effect of election, cannot at the same time be
the cause of election.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There is an analogy between prayer and its answer, on the one hand, and faith and
salvation on the other. God has decreed answer in connection with prayer, and salvation
in connection with faith. But he does not change his mind when men pray, or
when they believe. As he fulfils his purpose by inspiring true prayer, so he fulfils
his purpose by giving faith. Augustine: <q>He chooses us, not because we believe,
but that we may believe: lest we should say that we first chose him.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 15:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Ye
did not choose me, but I chose you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 9:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>from the same lump</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>not of him that willeth</hi></q>.)
</p>

<p>
Here see the valuable discussion of Wardlaw, Systematic Theol., 2:485-549&mdash;<q>Election
and salvation on the ground of works foreseen are not different in principle from
election and salvation on the ground of works performed.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Prov. 21:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The king's
heart is in the hand of Jehovah as the watercourses; He turneth it whithersoever he will</hi></q>&mdash;as easily as the
rivulets of the eastern fields are turned by the slightest motion of the hand or the foot
of the husbandman; <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 110:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Thy people offer themselves willingly In the day of thy power.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The depravity of the human will is such that, without this decree to
bestow special divine influences upon some, all, without exception, would
have rejected Christ's salvation after it was offered to them; and so all,
without exception, must have perished. Election, therefore, may be
viewed as a necessary consequence of God's decree to provide an objective
redemption, if that redemption is to have any subjective result in human
salvation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Before the prodigal son seeks the father, the father must first seek him,&mdash;a truth
brought out in the preceding parables of the lost money and the lost sheep (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 15</hi>).
Without election, all are lost. Newman Smyth, Orthodox Theology of To-day, 56&mdash;<q>The
worst doctrine of election, to-day, is taught by our natural science. The scientific
doctrine of natural selection is the doctrine of election, robbed of all hope, and
without a single touch of human pity in it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:335&mdash;<q>Suppose the deistic view be true: God created men
and left them; surely no man could complain of the results. But now suppose God,
foreseeing these very results of creation, should create. Would it make any difference,
if God's purpose, as to the futurition of such a world, should precede it? Augustine
supposes that God did purpose such a world as the deist supposes, with two exceptions:
(1) he interposes to restrain evil; (2) he intervenes, by providence, by Christ, and by
the Holy Spirit, to save some from destruction.</q> Election is simply God's determination
that the sufferings of Christ shall not be in vain; that all men shall not be lost;
that some shall be led to accept Christ; that to this end special influences of his Spirit
shall be given.
</p>

<p>
At first sight it might appear that God's appointing men to salvation was simply
permissive, as was his appointment to condemnation (<hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 2:8</hi>), and that this appointment
was merely indirect by creating them with foresight of their faith or their disobedience.
But the decree of salvation is not simply permissive,&mdash;it is efficient also.
It is a decree to use special means for the salvation of some. A. A. Hodge, Popular
Lectures, 143&mdash;<q>The dead man cannot spontaneously originate his own quickening,
nor the creature his own creating, nor the infant his own begetting. Whatever man
may do after regeneration, the first quickening of the dead must originate with God.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hovey, Manual of Theology, 287&mdash;<q>Calvinism, reduced to its lowest terms, is election
of believers, not on account of any foreseen conduct of theirs, either before or in
the act of conversion, which would be spiritually better than that of others influenced
by the same grace, but on account of their foreseen greater usefulness in manifesting
the glory of God to moral beings and of their foreseen non-commission of the sin
<pb n='785'/><anchor id='Pg785'/>
against the Holy Spirit.</q> But even here we must attribute the greater usefulness and
the abstention from fatal sin, not to man's unaided powers but to the divine decree:
see <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God afore prepared that
we should walk in them.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The doctrine of election becomes more acceptable to reason when
we remember: first, that God's decree is eternal, and in a certain sense is
contemporaneous with man's belief in Christ; secondly, that God's decree
to create involves the decree of all that in the exercise of man's freedom
will follow; thirdly, that God's decree is the decree of him who is all in
all, so that our willing and doing is at the same time the working of him
who decrees our willing and doing. The whole question turns upon the
initiative in human salvation: if this belongs to God, then in spite of difficulties
we must accept the doctrine of election.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The timeless existence of God may be the source of many of our difficulties with
regard to election, and with a proper view of God's eternity these difficulties might be
removed. Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 349-351&mdash;<q>Eternity is commonly thought of as
if it were a state or series anterior to time and to be resumed again when time comes
to an end. This, however, only reduces eternity to time again, and puts the life of God
in the same line with our own, only coming from further back.... At present we do
not see how time and eternity meet.</q>
</p>

<p>
Royce, World and Individual, 2:374&mdash;<q>God does not temporally foreknow anything,
except so far as he is expressed in us finite beings. The knowledge that exists in time
is the knowledge that finite beings possess, in so far as they are finite. And no such
foreknowledge can predict the special features of individual deeds precisely so far as
they are unique. Foreknowledge in time is possible only of the general, and of the
causally predetermined, and not of the unique and free. Hence neither God nor man
can foreknow perfectly, at any temporal moment, what a free will agent is yet to do.
On the other hand, the Absolute possesses a perfect knowledge at one glance of the
whole of the temporal order, past, present and future. This knowledge is ill called
foreknowledge. It is eternal knowledge. And as there is an eternal knowledge of all
individuality and of all freedom, free acts are known as occurring, like the chords in
the musical succession, precisely when and how they actually occur.</q> While we see
much truth in the preceding statement, we find in it no bar to our faith that God can
translate his eternal knowledge into finite knowledge and can thus put it for special
purposes in possession of his creatures.
</p>

<p>
E. H. Johnson, Theology, 2d ed., 250&mdash;<q>Foreknowing what his creatures would do,
God decreed their destiny when he decreed their creation; and this would still be the
case, although every man had the partial control over his destiny that Arminians
aver, or even the complete control that Pelagians claim. The decree is as absolute as
if there were no freedom, but it leaves them as free as if there were no decree.</q> A. H.
Strong, Christ in Creation, 40, 42&mdash;<q>As the Logos or divine Reason, Christ dwells in
humanity everywhere and constitutes the principle of its being. Humanity shares
with Christ in the image of God. That image is never wholly lost. It is completely
restored in sinners when the Spirit of Christ secures control of their wills and leads
them to merge their life in his.... If Christ be the principle and life of all things,
then divine sovereignty and human freedom, if they are not absolutely reconciled, at
least lose their ancient antagonism, and we can rationally <q><hi rend='italic'>work out our own salvation</hi>,</q> for
the very reason that <q><hi rend='italic'>it is God that worketh in us, both to will and to work, for his good pleasure</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Phil.
2:12, 13</hi>).</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Objections to the Doctrine of Election.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It is unjust to those who are not included in this purpose of salvation.&mdash;Answer:
Election deals, not simply with creatures, but with sinful,
guilty, and condemned creatures. That any should be saved, is matter of
pure grace, and those who are not included in this purpose of salvation
suffer only the due reward of their deeds. There is, therefore, no injustice
in God's election. We may better praise God that he saves any, than charge
him with injustice because he saves so few.
</p>

<pb n='786'/><anchor id='Pg786'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God can say to all men, saved or unsaved, <q><hi rend='italic'>Friend, I do thee no wrong.... Is it not lawful for me
to do what I will with mine own?</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 20:13, 15</hi>). The question is not whether a father will treat
his children alike, but whether a sovereign must treat condemned rebels alike. It is
not true that, because the Governor pardons one convict from the penitentiary, he
must therefore pardon all. When he pardons one, no injury is done to those who are
left. But, in God's government, there is still less reason for objection; for God offers
pardon to all. Nothing prevents men from being pardoned but their unwillingness to
accept his pardon. Election is simply God's determination to make certain persons
willing to accept it. Because justice cannot save all, shall it therefore save none?
</p>

<p>
Augustine, De Predest. Sanct., 8&mdash;<q>Why does not God teach all? Because it is in
mercy that he teaches all whom he does teach, while it is in judgment that he does not
teach those whom he does not teach.</q> In his Manual of Theology and Ethics, 260,
Hovey remarks that <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 9:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who art thou that repliest against God?</hi></q>&mdash;teaches, not that might
makes right, but that God is morally entitled to glorify either his righteousness or his
mercy in disposing of a guilty race. It is not that he chooses to save only a few ship-wrecked
and drowning creatures, but that he chooses to save only a part of a great
company who are bent on committing suicide. <hi rend='italic'>Prov. 8:36</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that sinneth against me wrongeth
his own soul: All they that hate me love death.</hi></q> It is best for the universe at large that some should
be permitted to have their own way and show how dreadful a thing is opposition to
God. See Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:455.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It represents God as partial in his dealings and a respecter of persons.&mdash;Answer:
Since there is nothing in men that determines God's choice
of one rather than another, the objection is invalid. It would equally apply
to God's selection of certain nations, as Israel, and certain individuals, as
Cyrus, to be recipients of special temporal gifts. If God is not to be
regarded as partial in not providing a salvation for fallen angels, he cannot
be regarded as partial in not providing regenerating influences of his Spirit
for the whole race of fallen men.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 44:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For they gat not the land in possession by their own sword, Neither did their own arm save them; But
thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, Because thou wast favorable unto them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Is. 45:1, 4, 5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Thus
saith Jehovah to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him.... For
Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel my chosen, I have called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou
hast not known me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 4:25-27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>There were many widows in Israel ... and unto none of them was Elijah
sent, but only to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. And there were many lepers in
Israel ... and none of them was cleansed, but only Naaman the Syrian</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 4:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For who maketh thee to
differ? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? but if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou
hadst not received it?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 2:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God spared not angels when they sinned, but cast them down to hell</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb.
2:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For verily not to angels doth he give help, but he giveth help to the seed of Abraham.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Is God partial, in choosing Israel, Cyrus, Naaman? Is God partial, in bestowing upon
some of his servants special ministerial gifts? Is God partial, in not providing a salvation
for fallen angels? In God's providence, one man is born in a Christian land, the
son of a noble family, is endowed with beauty of person, splendid talents, exalted
opportunities, immense wealth. Another is born at the Five Points, or among the
Hottentots, amid the degradation and depravity of actual, or practical, heathenism.
We feel that it is irreverent to complain of God's dealings in providence. What right
have sinners to complain of God's dealings in the distribution of his grace? Hovey:
<q>We have no reason to think that God treats all moral beings alike. We should be glad
to hear that other races are treated better than we.</q>
</p>

<p>
Divine election is only the ethical side and interpretation of natural selection. In the
latter God chooses certain forms of the vegetable and animal kingdom without merit
of theirs. They are preserved while others die. In the matter of individual health,
talent, property, one is taken and the other left. If we call all this the result of system,
the reply is that God chose the system, knowing precisely what would come of it.
Bruce, Apologetics, 201&mdash;<q>Election to distinction in philosophy or art is not incomprehensible,
for these are not matters of vital concern; but election to holiness on the
part of some, and to unholiness on the part of others, would be inconsistent with God's
own holiness.</q> But there is no such election to unholiness except on the part of man
himself. God's election secures only the good. See (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) below.
</p>

<p>
J. J. Murphy, Natural Selection and Spiritual Freedom, 73&mdash;<q>The world is ordered
on a basis of inequality; in the organic world, as Darwin has shown, it is of inequality&mdash;of
<pb n='787'/><anchor id='Pg787'/>
favored races&mdash;that all progress comes; history shows the same to be true of the
human and spiritual world. All human progress is due to elect human individuals, elect
not only to be a blessing to themselves, but still more to be a blessing to multitudes of
others. Any superiority, whether in the natural or in the mental and spiritual world,
becomes a vantage-ground for gaining a greater superiority.... It is the method of
the divine government, acting in the provinces both of nature and of grace, that all
benefit should come to the many through the elect few.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It represents God as arbitrary.&mdash;Answer: It represents God, not
as arbitrary, but as exercising the free choice of a wise and sovereign will, in
ways and for reasons which are inscrutable to us. To deny the possibility
of such a choice is to deny God's personality. To deny that God has
reasons for his choice is to deny his wisdom. The doctrine of election finds
these reasons, not in men, but in God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
When a regiment is decimated for insubordination, the fact that every tenth man is
chosen for death is for reasons; but the reasons are not in the men. In one case, the
reason for God's choice seems revealed: <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 1:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that
in me as chief might Jesus Christ show forth all his longsuffering, for an ensample of them that should thereafter believe
on him unto eternal life</hi></q>&mdash;here Paul indicates that the reason why God chose him was that
he was so great a sinner: <hi rend='italic'>verse 15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.</hi></q>
Hovey remarks that <q>the uses to which God can put men, as vessels of grace, may
determine his selection of them.</q> But since the naturally weak are saved, as well as
the naturally strong, we cannot draw any general conclusion, or discern any general
rule, in God's dealings, unless it be this, that in election God seeks to illustrate the
greatness and the variety of his grace,&mdash;the reasons lying, therefore, not in men, but
in God. We must remember that God's <emph>sovereignty</emph> is the sovereignty of <emph>God</emph>&mdash;the infinitely
wise, holy and loving God, in whose hands the destinies of men can be left more
safely than in the hands of the wisest, most just, and most kind of his creatures.
</p>

<p>
We must believe in the grace of sovereignty as well as in the sovereignty of grace.
Election and reprobation are not matters of arbitrary will. God saves all whom he can
wisely save. He will show benevolence in the salvation of mankind just so far as he
can without prejudice to holiness. No man can be saved without God, but it is also
true that there is no man whom God is not willing to save. H. B. Smith, System, 511&mdash;<q>It
may be that many of the finally impenitent resist more light than many of the
saved.</q> Harris, Moral Evolution, 401 (for substance)&mdash;<q>Sovereignty is not lost in
Fatherhood, but is recovered as the divine law of righteous love. Doubtless thou art
our Father, though Augustine be ignorant of us, and Calvin acknowledge us not.</q>
Hooker, Eccl. Polity, 1:2&mdash;<q>They err who think that of God's will there is no reason
except his will.</q> T. Erskine, The Brazen Serpent, 259&mdash;Sovereignty is <q>just a name
for what is <emph>unrevealed</emph> of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
We do not know <emph>all</emph> of God's reasons for saving particular men, but we do know <emph>some</emph>
of the reasons, for he has revealed them to us. These reasons are not men's merits or
works. We have mentioned the first of these reasons: (1) Men's greater sin and need;
<hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 1:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that in me as chief might Jesus Christ show forth all his longsuffering.</hi></q> We may add to this:
(2) The fact that men have not sinned against the Holy Spirit and made themselves
unreceptive to Christ's salvation; <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 1:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief</hi></q>&mdash;the
fact that Paul had not sinned with full knowledge of what he did was a reason
why God could choose him. (3) Men's ability by the help of Christ to be witnesses and
martyrs for their Lord; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 9:15, 16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles
and kings, and the children of Israel: for I will show him how many things he must suffer for my name's sake.</hi></q> As
Paul's mission to the Gentiles may have determined God's choice, so Augustine's mission
to the sensual and abandoned may have had the same influence. But if Paul's
sins, as foreseen, constituted one reason why God chose to save him, why might not his
ability to serve the kingdom have constituted another reason? We add therefore: (4)
Men's foreseen ability to serve Christ's kingdom in bringing others to the knowledge of
the truth; <hi rend='italic'>John 15:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I chose you and appointed you, that ye should go and bear fruit.</hi></q> Notice however
that this is choice <emph>to</emph> service, and not simply choice <emph>on account of service</emph>. In all these
cases the reasons do not lie in the men themselves, for what these men are and what
they possess is due to God's providence and grace.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) It tends to immorality, by representing men's salvation as independent
of their own obedience.&mdash;Answer: The objection ignores the fact
<pb n='788'/><anchor id='Pg788'/>
that the salvation of believers is ordained only in connection with their
regeneration and sanctification, as means; and that the certainty of final
triumph is the strongest incentive to strenuous conflict with sin.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Plutarch: <q>God is the brave man's hope, and not the coward's excuse.</q> The purposes
of God are an anchor to the storm-tossed spirit. But a ship needs engine, as well
as anchor. God does not elect to save any without repentance and faith. Some hold
the doctrine of election, but the doctrine of election does not hold them. Such should
ponder <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:2</hi>, in which Christians are said to be elect, <q><hi rend='italic'>in sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience
and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Augustine: <q>He loved her [the church] foul, that he might make her fair.</q> Dr.
John Watson (Ian McLaren): <q>The greatest reinforcement religion could have in our
time would be a return to the ancient belief in the sovereignty of God.</q> This is
because there is lack of a strong conviction of sin, guilt, and helplessness, still remaining
pride and unwillingness to submit to God, imperfect faith in God's trustworthiness
and goodness. We must not exclude Arminians from our fellowship&mdash;there are too
many good Methodists for that. But we may maintain that they hold but half the
truth, and that absence of the doctrine of election from their creed makes preaching
less serious and character less secure.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) It inspires pride in those who think themselves elect.&mdash;Answer:
This is possible only in the case of those who pervert the doctrine. On
the contrary, its proper influence is to humble men. Those who exalt
themselves above others, upon the ground that they are special favorites of
God, have reason to question their election.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In the novel, there was great effectiveness in the lover's plea to the object of his
affection, that he had loved since he had first set his eyes upon her in her childhood.
But God's love for us is of longer standing than that. It dates back to a time before
we were born,&mdash;aye, even to eternity past. It is a love which was fastened upon us,
although God knew the worst of us. It is unchanging, because founded upon his
infinite and eternal love to Christ. <hi rend='italic'>Jer. 31:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Jehovah appeared of old unto me, saying, Yea, I have
loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with lovingkindness have I drawn thee</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:31-39</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If God is for
us, who is against us?... Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?</hi></q> And the answer is, that
nothing <q><hi rend='italic'>shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord</hi>.</q> This eternal
love subdues and humbles: <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 115:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Not unto us, O Jehovah, not unto us, But unto thy name give glory
For thy lovingkindness, and for thy truth's sake.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Of the effect of the doctrine of election, Calvin, in his Institutes, 3:22:1, remarks
that <q>when the human mind hears of it, its irritation breaks all restraint, and it discovers
as serious and violent agitation as if alarmed by the sound of a martial
trumpet.</q> The cause of this agitation is the apprehension of the fact that one is an
enemy of God and yet absolutely dependent upon his mercy. This apprehension leads
normally to submission. But the conquered rebel can give no thanks to himself,&mdash;all
thanks are due to God who has chosen and renewed him. The affections elicited are
not those of pride and self-complacency, but of gratitude and love.
</p>

<p>
Christian hymnology witnesses to these effects. Isaac Watts († 1748): <q>Why was I
made to hear thy voice And enter while there's room, When thousands make a wretched
choice, And rather starve than come. 'T was the same love that spread the feast That
sweetly forced me in; Else I had still refused to taste, And perished in my sin. Pity
the nations, O our God! Constrain the earth to come; Send thy victorious word
abroad, And bring the wanderers home.</q> Josiah Conder († 1855): <q>'Tis not that I did
choose thee, For, Lord, that could not be; This heart would still refuse thee; But thou
hast chosen me;&mdash;Hast, from the sin that stained me, Washed me and set me free, And
to this end ordained me That I should live to thee. 'T was sovereign mercy called me,
And taught my opening mind; The world had else enthralled me, To heavenly glories
blind. My heart owns none above thee: For thy rich grace I thirst; This knowing,&mdash;if
I love thee, Thou must have loved me first.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) It discourages effort for the salvation of the impenitent, whether on
their own part or on the part of others.&mdash;Answer: Since it is a secret
decree, it cannot hinder or discourage such effort. On the other hand, it
is a ground of encouragement, and so a stimulus to effort; for, without
<pb n='789'/><anchor id='Pg789'/>
election, it is certain that all would be lost (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Acts 18:10). While it
humbles the sinner, so that he is willing to err for mercy, it encourages
him also by showing him that some will be saved, and (since election and
faith are inseparably connected) that he will be saved, if he will only
believe. While it makes the Christian feel entirely dependent on God's
power, in his efforts for the impenitent, it leads him to say with Paul that
he <q>endures all things for the elects' sake, that they also may attain the
salvation that is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory</q> (2 Tim. 2:10).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God's decree that Paul's ship's company should be saved (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 27:24</hi>) did not obviate
the necessity of their abiding in the ship (<hi rend='italic'>verse 31</hi>). In marriage, man's election does
not exclude woman's; so God's election does not exclude man's. There is just as much
need of effort as if there were no election. Hence the question for the sinner is not,
<q>Am I one of the elect?</q> but rather, <q>What shall I do to be saved?</q> Milton represents
the spirits of hell as debating foreknowledge and free will, in wandering mazes
lost.
</p>

<p>
No man is saved until he ceases to debate, and begins to act. And yet no man will
thus begin to act, unless God's Spirit moves him. The Lord encouraged Paul by saying
to him: <q><hi rend='italic'>I have much people in this city</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 18:10</hi>)&mdash;people whom I will bring in through
thy word. <q>Old Adam is too strong for young Melanchthon.</q> If God does not regenerate,
there is no hope of success in preaching: <q>God stands powerless before the
majesty of man's lordly will. Sinners have the glory of their own salvation. To pray
God to convert a man is absurd. God elects the man, because he foresees that the man
will elect himself</q> (see S. R. Mason, Truth Unfolded, 298-307). The doctrine of election
does indeed cut off the hopes of those who place confidence in themselves; but it
is best that such hopes should be destroyed, and that in place of them should be put a
hope in the sovereign grace of God. The doctrine of election does teach man's absolute
dependence upon God, and the impossibility of any disappointment or disarrangement
of the divine plans arising from the disobedience of the sinner, and it humbles
human pride until it is willing to take the place of a suppliant for mercy.
</p>

<p>
Rowland Hill was criticized for preaching election and yet exhorting sinners to repent,
and was told that he should preach only to the elect. He replied that, if his critic
would put a chalk-mark on all the elect, he would preach only to them. But this is
not the whole truth. We are not only ignorant who God's elect are, but we are set to
preach to both elect and non-elect (<hi rend='italic'>Ez. 2:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they
will hear, or whether they will forbear</hi></q>), with the certainty that to the former our preaching
will make a higher heaven, to the latter a deeper hell (<hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 2:15, 16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For we are a sweet savor
of Christ unto God, in them that are saved, and in them that perish; to the one a savor from death unto death; to the
other a savor from life unto life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Luke 2:34</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>this child is set for the falling and the rising of many in
Israel</hi></q>&mdash;for the falling of some, and for the rising up of others).
</p>

<p>
Jesus' own thanksgiving in <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 11:25, 26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou
didst hide these things from the wise and understanding, and didst reveal them unto babes: yea, Father, for so it was
well-pleasing in thy sight</hi></q>&mdash;is immediately followed by his invitation in <hi rend='italic'>verse 28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Come unto me,
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.</hi></q> There is no contradiction in his mind
between sovereign grace and the free invitations of the gospel.
</p>

<p>
G. W. Northrup, in The Standard, Sept. 19, 1889&mdash;<q>1. God will save every one of the
human race whom he can save and remain God; 2. Every member of the race has a
full and fair probation, so that all might be saved and would be saved were they to use
aright the light which they already have.</q>... (Private letter): <q>Limitations of God
in the bestowment of salvation: 1. In the power of God in relation to free will; 2. In
the benevolence of God which requires the greatest good of creation, or the greatest
aggregate good of the greatest number; 3. In the purpose of God to make the most
perfect self-limitation; 4. In the sovereignty of God, as a prerogative absolutely
optional in its exercise; 5. In the holiness of God, which involves immutable limitations
on his part in dealing with moral agents. Nothing but some absolute impossibility,
metaphysical or moral, could have prevented him 'whose nature and whose
name is love' from decreeing and securing the confirmation of all moral agents in holiness
and blessedness forever.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) The decree of election implies a decree of reprobation.&mdash;Answer:
The decree of reprobation is not a positive decree, like that of election,
<pb n='790'/><anchor id='Pg790'/>
but a permissive decree to leave the sinner to his self-chosen rebellion and
its natural consequences of punishment.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Election and sovereignty are only sources of good. Election is not a decree to
destroy,&mdash;it is a decree only to save. When we elect a President, we do not need to
hold a second election to determine that the remaining millions shall be non-Presidents.
It is needless to apply contrivance or force. Sinners, like water, if simply let
alone, will run down hill to ruin. The decree of reprobation is simply a decree to do
nothing&mdash;a decree to leave the sinner to himself. The natural result of this judicial
forsaking, on the part of God, is the hardening and destruction of the sinner. But it
must not be forgotten that this hardening and destruction are not due to any positive
efficiency of God,&mdash;they are a self-hardening and a self-destruction,&mdash;and God's judicial
forsaking is only the just penalty of the sinner's guilty rejection of offered mercy.
</p>

<p>
See <hi rend='italic'>Hosea 11:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?... my heart is turned within me, my compassions are
kindled together</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>4:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Ephraim is joined to idols; let him alone</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 9:22, 23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>What if God, willing to
show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much longsuffering vessels of wrath fitted unto destruction:
and that he might make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he afore prepared unto glory</hi></q>&mdash;here
notice that <q><hi rend='italic'>which he afore prepared</hi></q> declares a positive divine efficiency, in the case of
the vessels of mercy, while <q><hi rend='italic'>fitted unto destruction</hi></q> intimates no such positive agency of
God,&mdash;the vessels of wrath fitted themselves for destruction; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 2:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>vessels ...
some unto honor, and some unto dishonor</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 2:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they stumble at the word, being disobedient: whereunto
also they were appointed</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jude 4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who were of old set forth</hi> [<q><hi rend='italic'>written of beforehand</hi></q>&mdash;Am. Rev.] <hi rend='italic'>unto this
condemnation</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:34, 41</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the kingdom prepared for you ... the eternal fire which is prepared</hi> [not for
you, nor for men, but] <hi rend='italic'>for the devil and his angels</hi></q> = there is an election to life, but no
reprobation to death; a <q><hi rend='italic'>book of life</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:27</hi>), but no book of death.
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 313&mdash;<q>Reprobation, in the sense of absolute predestination
to sin and eternal damnation, is neither a sequence of the doctrine of election,
nor the teaching of the Scriptures.</q> Men are not <q><hi rend='italic'>appointed</hi></q> to disobedience and
stumbling in the same way that they are <q><hi rend='italic'>appointed</hi></q> to salvation. God uses positive
means to save, but not to destroy. Henry Ward Beecher: <q>The elect are whosoever
will; the non-elect are whosoever won't.</q> George A. Gordon, New Epoch for Faith,
44&mdash;<q>Election understood would have been the saving strength of Israel; election misunderstood
was its ruin. The nation felt that the election of it meant the rejection of
other nations.... The Christian church has repeated Israel's mistake.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Westminster Confession reads: <q>By the decree of God, for the manifestation of
his glory, some men and angels are predestinated unto everlasting life, and others to
everlasting death. These angels and men, thus predestinated and foreordained, are
particularly and unchangeably designed; and their number is so certain and definite
that it cannot be either increased or diminished. The rest of mankind God was
pleased, according to the unsearchable counsel of his own will, whereby he extendeth
or withholdeth mercy as he pleaseth, for the glory of his sovereign power over his
creatures, to pass by and to ordain them to dishonor and wrath for their sin, to the
praise of his glorious justice.</q> This reads as if both the saved and the lost were made
originally for their respective final estates without respect to character. It is supralapsarianism.
It is certain that the supralapsarians were in the majority in the Westminster
Assembly, and that they determined the form of the statement, although there
were many sublapsarians who objected that it was only on account of their foreseen
wickedness that any were reprobated. In its later short statement of doctrine the
Presbyterian body in America has made it plain that God's decree of reprobation is a
permissive decree, and that it places no barrier in the way of any man's salvation.
</p>

<p>
On the general subject of Election, see Mozley, Predestination; Payne, Divine Sovereignty;
Ridgeley, Works, 1:261-324, esp. 322; Edwards, Works, 2:527 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Van Oosterzee,
Dogmatics, 446-458; Martensen, Dogmatics, 362-382; and especially Wardlaw,
Systematic Theology, 485-549; H. B. Smith, Syst. of Christian Theology, 502-514; Maule,
Outlines of Christian Doctrine, 36-56; Peck, in Bapt. Quar. Rev., Oct. 1891:689-706. On
objections to election, and Spurgeon's answers to them, see Williams, Reminiscences
of Spurgeon, 189. On the homiletical uses of the doctrine of election, see Bib. Sac.,
Jan. 1893:79-92.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Calling.</head>

<p>
Calling is that act of God by which men are invited to accept, by faith,
the salvation provided by Christ.&mdash;The Scriptures distinguish between:
</p>

<pb n='791'/><anchor id='Pg791'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>The general, or external, call</hi> to all men through God's providence,
word, and Spirit.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Is. 45:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is none else</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>55:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Seek
ye Jehovah while he may be found; call ye upon him while he is near</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>65:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when I called, ye did not
answer; when I spake, ye did not hear; but ye did that which was evil in mine eyes, and chose that wherein I delighted
not</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ez. 33:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the
wicked turn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?</hi></q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 11:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>22:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>sent forth
his servants to call them that were bidden to the marriage feast: and they would not come</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mark 16:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Go ye
into all the world, and preach the gospel to the whole creation</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 12:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I, if I be lifted up from the earth,
will draw all men unto myself</hi></q>&mdash;draw, not drag; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 3:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any
man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>The special, efficacious call</hi> of the Holy Spirit to the elect.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 14:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Go out into the highways and hedges, and constrain them to come in, that my house may be filled</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 1:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to all that are in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints: Grace to you and peace from God our father
and the Lord Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>8:30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whom he foreordained, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also
justified</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>11:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the gifts and the calling of God are not repented of</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:23, 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>but we preach
Christ crucified, unto Jews a stumblingblock, and unto Gentiles foolishness; but unto them that are called, both Jews
and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For behold your calling, brethren, that not many
wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I press on toward the goal unto the
prize of the high</hi> [marg. <q><hi rend='italic'>upward</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>calling of God in Christ Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that ye may know what is the hope
of his calling, what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 2:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to the end that ye should
walk worthily of God, who calleth you into his own kingdom and glory</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 2:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whereunto he called you
through our gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 1:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who saved us, and called
us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in
Christ Jesus before times eternal</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 3:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 1:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Wherefore,
brethren, give the more diligence to make your calling and election sure.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Two questions only need special consideration:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. Is God's general call sincere?</head>

<p>
This is denied, upon the ground that such sincerity is incompatible,
first, with the inability of the sinner to obey; and secondly, with the
design of God to bestow only upon the elect the special grace without
which they will not obey.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) To the first objection we reply that, since this inability is not a
physical but a moral inability, consisting simply in the settled perversity
of an evil will, there can be no insincerity in offering salvation to all, especially
when the offer is in itself a proper motive to obedience.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God's call to all men to repent and to believe the gospel is no more insincere than his
command to all men to love him with all the heart. There is no obstacle in the way of
men's obedience to the gospel, that does not exist to prevent their obedience to the law.
If it is proper to publish the commands of the law, it is proper to publish the invitations
of the gospel. A human being may be perfectly sincere in giving an invitation
which he knows will be refused. He may desire to have the invitation accepted, while
yet he may, for certain reasons of justice or personal dignity, be unwilling to put forth
special efforts, aside from the invitation itself, to secure the acceptance of it on the
part of those to whom it is offered. So God's desires that certain men should be saved
may not be accompanied by his will to exert special influences to save them.
</p>

<p>
These desires were meant by the phrase <q>revealed will</q> in the old theologians; his
purpose to bestow special grace, by the phrase <q>secret will.</q> It is of the former that
Paul speaks, in <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim, 2:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who would have all men to be saved.</hi></q> Here we have, not the active
σῶσαι, but the passive σωθῆναι. The meaning is, not that God <emph>purposes</emph> to save all men,
but that he <emph>desires</emph> all men to be saved through repenting and believing the gospel.
Hence God's revealed will, or desire, that all men should be saved, is perfectly consistent
with his secret will, or purpose, to bestow special grace only upon a certain
number (see, on <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 2:4</hi>, Fairbairn's Commentary on the Pastoral Epistles).
</p>

<p>
The sincerity of God's call is shown, not only in the fact that the only obstacle to
compliance, on the sinner's part, is the sinner's own evil will, but also in the fact that
<pb n='792'/><anchor id='Pg792'/>
God has, at infinite cost, made a complete external provision, upon the ground of
which <q><hi rend='italic'>he that will</hi></q> may <q><hi rend='italic'>come</hi></q> and <q><hi rend='italic'>take the water of life freely</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 22:17</hi>); so that God can
truly say: <q><hi rend='italic'>What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it?</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Is. 5:4</hi>).
Broadus, Com. on <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 6:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Thy will be done</hi></q>&mdash;distinguishes between God's will of purpose,
of desire, and of command. H. B. Smith, Syst. Theol., 521&mdash;<q>Common grace
passes over into effectual grace in proportion as the sinner yields to the divine influence.
Effectual grace is that which effects what common grace tends to effect.</q> See
also Studien und Kritiken, 1887:7 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) To the second, we reply that the objection, if true, would equally
hold against God's foreknowledge. The sincerity of God's general call is
no more inconsistent with his determination that some shall be permitted
to reject it, than it is with foreknowledge that some will reject it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:643&mdash;<q>Predestination concerns only the purpose of God to
render effectual, in particular cases, a call addressed to all. A general amnesty, on certain
conditions, may be offered by a sovereign to rebellious subjects, although he
knows that through pride or malice many will refuse to accept it; and even though,
for wise reasons, he should determine not to constrain their assent, supposing that
such influence over their minds were within his power. It is evident, from the nature
of the call, that it has nothing to do with the secret purpose of God to grant his effectual
grace to some, and not to others.... According to the Augustinian scheme, the
non-elect have all the advantages and opportunities of securing their salvation, which,
according to any other scheme, are granted to mankind indiscriminately.... God
designed, in its adoption, to save his own people, but he consistently offers its benefits
to all who are willing to receive them.</q> See also H. B. Smith, System of Christian
Theology, 515-521.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. Is God's special call irresistible?</head>

<p>
We prefer to say that this special call is efficacious,&mdash;that is, that it infallibly
accomplishes its purpose of leading the sinner to the acceptance of
salvation. This implies two things:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That the operation of God is not an outward constraint upon the
human will, but that it accords with the laws of our mental constitution.
We reject the term <q>irresistible,</q> as implying a coercion and compulsion
which is foreign to the nature of God's working in the soul.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 110:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Thy people are freewill-offerings in the day of thy power: in holy array, Out of the womb of the morning
Thou hast the dew of thy youth</hi></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, youthful recruits to thy standard, as numberless and
as bright as the drops of morning dew; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling; for it is God who worketh in you both to will and to work, for his good pleasure</hi></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, the result of
God's working is our own working. The Lutheran Formula of Concord properly condemns
the view that, before, in, and after conversion, the will only resists the Holy
Spirit: for this, it declares, is the very nature of conversion, that out of non-willing,
God makes willing, persons (F. C. 60, 581, 582, 673).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hos. 4:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Israel hath behaved himself stubbornly, like a stubborn heifer,</hi></q> or <q><hi rend='italic'>or as a heifer that slideth back</hi></q>
= when the sacrificial offering is brought forward to be slain, it holds back, settling on
its haunches so that it has to be pushed and forced before it can be brought to the
altar. These are not <q><hi rend='italic'>the sacrifices of God</hi></q> which are <q><hi rend='italic'>a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 51:17</hi>). E. H. Johnson, Theology, 2d ed., 250&mdash;<q>The N. T. nowhere declares, or even
intimates, ... that the general call of the Holy Spirit is insufficient. And furthermore,
it never states that the efficient call is irresistible. Psychologically, to speak of
irresistible influence upon the faculty of self-determination in man is express contradiction
in terms. No harm can come from acknowledging that we do not know God's
unrevealed reasons for electing one individual rather than another to eternal life.</q>
Dr. Johnson goes on to argue that if, without disparagement to grace, faith can be a
condition of justification, faith might also be a condition of election, and that inasmuch
as salvation is <emph>received</emph> as a gift only on condition of faith exercised, it is in <emph>purpose</emph> a
gift, even if only on condition of faith foreseen. This seems to us to ignore the abundant
Scripture testimony that faith itself is God's gift, and therefore the initiative must
be wholly with God.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='793'/><anchor id='Pg793'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the operation of God is the originating cause of that new disposition
of the affections, and that new activity of the will, by which the
sinner accepts Christ. The cause is not in the response of the will to the
presentation of motives by God, nor in any mere coöperation of the will of
man with the will of God, but is an almighty act of God in the will of man,
by which its freedom to choose God as its end is restored and rightly exercised
(John 1:12, 13). For further discussion of the subject, see, in the
next section, the remarks on Regeneration, with which this efficacious call
is identical.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 1:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But as many as received him, to them gave he the right to become children of God, even to them
that believe on his name: who were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.</hi></q>
God's saving grace and effectual calling are irresistible, not in the sense that they are
never resisted, but in the sense that they are never successfully resisted. See Andrew
Fuller, Works, 2:373, 513, and 3:807; Gill, Body of Divinity, 2:121-130; Robert Hall,
Works, 3:75.
</p>

<p>
Matheson, Moments on the Mount, 128, 129&mdash;<q>Thy love to Him is to his love to thee
what the sunlight on the sea is to the sunshine in the sky&mdash;a reflex, a mirror, a diffusion;
thou art giving back the glory that has been cast upon the waters. In the
attraction of thy life to him, in the cleaving of thy heart to him, in the soaring of thy
spirit to him, thou art told that he is near thee, thou hearest the beating of his pulse
for thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 302&mdash;<q>In regard to our reason and to the essence of our
ideals, there is no real dualism between man and God; but in the case of the will which
constitutes the essence of each man's individuality, there is a real dualism, and therefore
a possible antagonism between the will of the dependent spirit, man, and the will
of the absolute and universal spirit, God. Such <emph>real</emph> duality of will, and not the <emph>appearance</emph>
of duality, as F. H. Bradley put it, is the essential condition of ethics and religion.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section II.&mdash;The Application Of Christ's Redemption
In Its Actual Beginning.</head>

<p>
Under this head we treat of Union with Christ, Regeneration, Conversion
(embracing Repentance and Faith), and Justification. Much confusion
and error have arisen from conceiving these as occurring in chronological
order. The order is logical, not chronological. As it is only <q>in Christ</q>
that man is <q>a new creature</q> (2 Cor. 5:17) or is <q>justified</q> (Acts 13:39),
union with Christ logically precedes both regeneration and justification;
and yet, chronologically, the moment of our union with Christ is also the
moment when we are regenerated and justified. So, too, regeneration and
conversion are but the divine and human sides or aspects of the same fact,
although regeneration has logical precedence, and man turns only as God
turns him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 3:694 (Syst. Doct., 4:159), gives at this point an account of
the work of the Holy Spirit in general. The Holy Spirit's work, he says, presupposes
the historical work of Christ, and prepares the way for Christ's return. <q>As the Holy
Spirit is the principle of union between the Father and the Son, so he is the principle of
union between God and man. Only through the Holy Spirit does Christ secure for himself
those who will love him as distinct and free personalities.</q> Regeneration and conversion
are not chronologically separate. Which of the spokes of a wheel starts first?
The ray of light and the ray of heat enter at the same moment. Sensation and perception
are not separated in time, although the former is the cause of the latter.
</p>

<pb n='794'/><anchor id='Pg794'/>

<p>
<q>Suppose a non-elastic tube extending across the Atlantic. Suppose that the tube is
completely filled with an incompressible fluid. Then there would be no interval of time
between the impulse given to the fluid at this end of the tube, and the effect upon the
fluid at the other end.</q> See Hazard, Causation and Freedom in Willing, 33-38, who
argues that cause and effect are always simultaneous; else, in the intervening time,
there would be a cause that had no effect; that is, a cause that caused nothing; that is,
a cause that that was not a cause. <q rend='pre'>A potential cause may exist for an unlimited
period without producing any effect, and of course may precede its effect by any length
of time. But actual, effective cause being the exercise of a sufficient power, its effect
cannot be delayed; for, in that case, there would be the exercise of a sufficient power
to produce the effect, without producing it,&mdash;involving the absurdity of its being both
sufficient and insufficient at the same time.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A difficulty may here be suggested in regard to the flow or progress of events in
time, if they are all simultaneous with their causes. This difficulty cannot arise as to
intelligent effort; for, in regard to it, periods of non-action may continually intervene;
but if there are series of events and material phenomena, each of which is in turn effect
and cause, it may be difficult to see how any time could elapse between the first and
the last of the series.... If, however, as I suppose, these series of events, or material
changes, are always effected through the medium of motion, it need not trouble us, for
there is precisely the same difficulty in regard to our conception of the motion of matter
from point to point, there being no space or length between any two consecutive points,
and yet the body in motion gets from one end of a long line to the other, and in this
case this difficulty just neutralizes the other.... So, even if we cannot conceive how
motion involves the idea of time, we may perceive that, if it does so, it may be a means
of conveying events, which depend upon it, through time also.</q>
</p>

<p>
Martineau, Study, 1:148-150&mdash;<q>Simultaneity does not exclude duration,</q>&mdash;since each
cause has duration and each effect has duration also. Bowne, Metaphysics, 106&mdash;<q>In
the system, the complete ground of an event never lies in any one thing, but only in a
complex of things. If a single thing were the sufficient ground of an effect, the effect
would coëxist with the thing, and all effects would be instantaneously given. Hence
all events in the system must be viewed as the result of the interaction of two or more
things.</q>
</p>

<p>
The first manifestation of life in an infant may be in the lungs or heart or brain, but
that which makes any and all of these manifestations possible is the antecedent life.
We may not be able to tell which comes first, but having the life we have all the rest.
When the wheel goes, all the spokes will go. The soul that is born again will show it in
faith and hope and love and holy living. Regeneration will involve repentance and
faith and justification and sanctification. But the one life which makes regeneration
and all these consequent blessings possible is the life of Christ who joins himself to us
in order that we may join ourselves to him. Anne Reeve Aldrich, The Meaning: <q>I
lost my life in losing love. This blurred my spring and killed its dove. Along my path
the dying roses Fell, and disclosed the thorns thereof. I found my life in finding God.
In ecstasy I kiss the rod; For who that wins the goal, but lightly Thinks of the thorns
whereon he trod?</q>
</p>

<p>
See A. A. Hodge, on the Ordo Salutis, in Princeton Rev., March, 1888:304-321. Union
with Christ, says Dr. Hodge, <q>is effected by the Holy Ghost in effectual calling. Of this
calling the parts are two: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the offering of Christ to the sinner, <emph>externally</emph> by the
gospel, and <emph>internally</emph> by the illumination of the Holy Ghost; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the reception of
Christ, which on our part is both passive and active. The passive reception is that
whereby a spiritual principle is ingenerated into the human will, whence issues the
active reception, which is an act of faith with which repentance is always conjoined.
The communion of benefits which results from this union involves: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) a change of
state or relation, called justification; and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) a change of subjective moral character,
commenced in regeneration and completed through sanctification.</q> See also Dr.
Hodge's Popular Lectures on Theological Themes, 340, and Outlines of Theology, 333-429.
</p>

<p>
H. B. Smith, however, in his System of Christian Theology, is more clear in the putting
of Union with Christ before Regeneration. On page 502, he begins his treatment of the
Application of Redemption with the title: <q>The Union between Christ and the individual
believer as effected by the Holy Spirit. This embraces the subjects of Justification,
Regeneration, and Sanctification, with the underlying topic which comes first to
be considered, Election.</q> He therefore treats Union with Christ (531-539) before Regeneration
(553-569). He says Calvin defines regeneration as coming to us by participation
in Christ, and apparently agrees with this view (559).
</p>

<pb n='795'/><anchor id='Pg795'/>


<p>
<q>This union [with Christ] is at the ground of regeneration and justification</q> (534).
<q>The great difference of theological systems comes out here. Since Christianity is
redemption through Christ, our mode of conceiving that will determine the character
of our whole theological system</q> (536). <q>The union with Christ is mediated by his
Spirit, whence we are both renewed and justified. The great fact of objective Christianity
is incarnation in order to atonement; the great fact of subjective Christianity
is union with Christ, whereby we receive the atonement</q> (537). We may add that this
union with Christ, in view of which God elects and to which God calls the sinner, is
begun in regeneration, completed in conversion, declared in justification, and proved
in sanctification and perseverance.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Union with Christ.</head>

<p>
The Scriptures declare that, through the operation of God, there is constituted
a union of the soul with Christ different in kind from God's natural
and providential concursus with all spirits, as well as from all unions of
mere association or sympathy, moral likeness, or moral influence,&mdash;a union
of life, in which the human spirit, while then most truly possessing its own
individuality and personal distinctness, is interpenetrated and energized by
the Spirit of Christ, is made inscrutably but indissolubly one with him,
and so becomes a member and partaker of that regenerated, believing, and
justified humanity of which he is the head.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Union with Christ is not union with a system of doctrine, nor with external religious
influences, nor with an organized church, nor with an ideal man,&mdash;but rather, with a
personal, risen, living, omnipresent Lord (J. W. A. Stewart). Dr. J. W. Alexander well
calls this doctrine of the Union of the Believer with Christ <q>the central truth of all
theology and of all religion.</q> Yet it receives little of formal recognition, either in
dogmatic treatises or in common religious experience. Quenstedt, 886-912, has devoted
a section to it; A. A. Hodge gives to it a chapter, in his Outlines of Theology, 369 sq., to
which we are indebted for valuable suggestions; H. B. Smith treats of it, not however
as a separate topic, but under the head of Justification (System, 531-539).
</p>

<p>
The majority of printed systems of doctrine, however, contain no chapter or section
on Union with Christ, and the majority of Christians much more frequently think of
Christ as a Savior outside of them, than as a Savior who dwells within. This comparative
neglect of the doctrine is doubtless a reaction from the exaggerations of a false
mysticism. But there is great need of rescuing the doctrine from neglect. For this we
rely wholly upon Scripture. Doctrines which reason can neither discover nor prove
need large support from the Bible. It is a mark of divine wisdom that the doctrine of
the Trinity, for example, is so inwoven with the whole fabric of the New Testament,
that the rejection of the former is the virtual rejection of the latter. The doctrine of
Union with Christ, in like manner, is taught so variously and abundantly, that to deny
it is to deny inspiration itself. See Kahnis, Luth. Dogmatik, 3:447-450.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Scripture Representations of this Union.</head>

<p>
A. Figurative teaching. It is illustrated:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From the union of a building and its foundation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:20-22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief
corner stone; in whom each several building, fitly framed together, groweth into a holy temple in the Lord; in whom
ye also are builded together for a habitation of God in the Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>builded up in him</hi></q>&mdash;grounded
in Christ as our foundation; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 2:4, 5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>unto whom coming, a living stone, rejected indeed of men, but
with God elect, precious, ye also, as living stones, are built up a spiritual house</hi></q>&mdash;each living stone in the
Christian temple is kept in proper relation to every other, and is made to do its part in
furnishing a habitation for God, only by being built upon and permanently connected
with Christ, the chief corner-stone. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 118:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The stone which the builders rejected Is become
the head of the corner</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Is. 28:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner-stone
of sure foundation: he that believeth shall not be in haste.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From the union between husband and wife.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 7:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye also were made dead to the law through the body of Christ; that ye should be joined to another,
even to him who was raised from the dead, that we might bring forth fruit unto God</hi></q>&mdash;here union with Christ
<pb n='796'/><anchor id='Pg796'/>
is illustrated by the indissoluble bond that connects husband and wife, and makes them
legally and organically one; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 11:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy: for I espoused you
to one husband, that I might present you as a pure virgin to Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 5:31, 32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For this cause shall a man
leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and the two shall become one flesh. This mystery is great:
but I speak in regard of Christ and of the church</hi></q>&mdash;Meyer refers <hi rend='italic'>verse 31</hi> wholly to Christ, and says
that Christ leaves father and mother (the right hand of God) and is joined to the
church as his wife, the two constituting thenceforth one moral person. He makes the
union future, however,&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother</hi></q>&mdash;the consummation
is at Christ's second coming. But the Fathers, as Chrysostom, Theodoret, and
Jerome, referred it more properly to the incarnation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 19:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>22:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the Spirit
and the bride say, Come</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Is. 54:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For thy Maker is thine husband</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jer. 3:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Surely as a wife
treacherously departeth from her husband, so have ye dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel, saith Jehovah</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Hos. 2:2-5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>for their mother hath played the harlot</hi></q>&mdash;departure from God is adultery; the <hi rend='italic'>Song of
Solomon</hi>, as Jewish interpreters have always maintained, is an allegorical poem describing,
under the figure of marriage, the union between Jehovah and his people: Paul
only adopts the Old Testament figure, and applies it more precisely to the union of
God with the church in Jesus Christ.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) From the union between the vine and its branches.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 15:1-10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same beareth much
fruit: for apart from me ye can do nothing</hi></q>&mdash;as God's natural life is in the vine, that it may give
life to its natural branches, so God's spiritual life is in the vine, Christ, that he may
give life to his spiritual branches. The roots of this new vine are planted in heaven,
not on earth; and into it the half-withered branches of the old humanity are to be
grafted, that they may have life divine. Yet our Lord does not say <q>I am the root.</q>
The branch is not something <emph>outside</emph>, which has to get nourishment <emph>out of</emph> the root,&mdash;it
is rather a <emph>part</emph> of the vine. <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if we have become united with him</hi> [σύμφυτοι&mdash;<q>grown
together</q>&mdash;used of the man and horse in the Centaur, Xen., Cyrop., 4:3:18], <hi rend='italic'>in the likeness
of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>11:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>thou wast cut out of that which is by
nature a wild olive tree, and wast grafted contrary to nature into a good olive tree</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:6, 7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>As therefore ye
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him, rooted and builded up in him</hi></q>&mdash;not only grounded in Christ
as our foundation, but thrusting down roots into him as the deep, rich, all-sustaining
soil. This union with Christ is consistent with individuality: for the graft brings forth
fruit after its kind, though modified by the tree into which it is grafted.
</p>

<p>
Bishop H. W. Warren, in S. S. Times, Oct. 17, 1891&mdash;<q>The lessons of the vine are
intimacy, likeness of nature, continuous impartation of life, fruit. Between friends
there is intimacy by means of media, such as food, presents, care, words, soul looking
from the eyes. The mother gives her liquid flesh to the babe, but such intimacy soon
ceases. The mother is not rich enough in life continuously to feed the ever-enlarging
nature of the growing man. Not so with the vine. It continuously feeds. Its rivers
crowd all the banks. They burst out in leaf, blossom, clinging tendrils, and fruit,
everywhere. In nature a thorn grafted on a pear tree bears only thorn. There is not
pear-life enough to compel change of its nature. But a wild olive, typical of depraved
nature, grafted on a good olive tree finds, contrary to nature, that there is force
enough in the growing stock to change the nature of the wild scion.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) From the union between the members and the head of the body.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 6:15, 19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Know ye not that your bodies are members of Christ?... know ye not that your body is a
temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye have from God?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>12:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For as the body is one, and hath
many members, and all the members of the body, being many, are one body; so also is Christ</hi></q>&mdash;here Christ is
identified with the church of which he is the head; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:22, 23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he put all things in subjection
under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth
all in all</hi></q>&mdash;as the members of the human body are united to the head, the source of
their activity and the power that controls their movements, so all believers are members
of an invisible body whose head is Christ. Shall we tie a string round the finger
to keep for it its own blood? No, for all the blood of the body is needed to nourish
one finger. So Christ is <q><hi rend='italic'>head over all things to</hi> [for the benefit of] <hi rend='italic'>the church</hi></q> (Tyler, Theol.
Greek Poets, preface, ii). <q>The church is the fulness (πλήρωμα) of Christ; as it was
not good for the first man, Adam, to be alone, no more was it good for the second man,
Christ</q> (C. H. M.). <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:15, 16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>grow up in all things into him, who is the head, even Christ; from
whom all the body ... maketh the increase of the body unto the building up of itself in love</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:29, 30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>for no
man ever hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as Christ also the church; because we are members
of his body.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='797'/><anchor id='Pg797'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) From the union of the race with the source of its life in Adam.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:12, 21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as through one man sin entered into the world, and death through sin.... that, as sin reigned in
death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:22,
45, 49</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive.... The first man Adam became a living soul.
The last Adam became a life-giving Spirit.... as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image
of the heavenly</hi></q>&mdash;as the whole race is one with the first man Adam, in whom it fell and
from whom it has derived a corrupted and guilty nature, so the whole race of believers
constitutes a new and restored humanity, whose justified and purified nature is derived
from Christ, the second Adam. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 2:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she
shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man</hi></q>&mdash;here C. H. M. remarks that, as man is first
created and then woman is viewed in and formed out of him, so it is with Christ and
the church. <q>We are members of Christ's body, because in Christ we have the principle
of our origin; from him our life arose, just as the life of Eve was derived from
Adam.... The church is Christ's helpmeet, formed out of Christ in his deep sleep of
death, as Eve out of Adam.... The church will be nearest to Christ, as Eve was to
Adam.</q> Because Christ is the source of all spiritual life for his people, he is called, in
<hi rend='italic'>Is. 9:6</hi>, <q><hi rend='italic'>Everlasting Father,</hi></q> and it is said, in <hi rend='italic'>Is. 53:10</hi>, that <q><hi rend='italic'>he shall see his seed</hi></q> (see page 680).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Direct statements.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The believer is said to be in Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Lest we should regard the figures mentioned above as merely Oriental metaphors,
the fact of the believer's union with Christ is asserted in the most direct and prosaic
manner. <hi rend='italic'>John 14:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye in me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>alive unto God in Christ Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>8:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if any man is in Christ, he is a new creature</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>chose
us in him before the foundation of the world</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>now in Christ Jesus ye that once were far off are made nigh in
the blood of Christ.</hi></q> Thus the believer is said to be <q><hi rend='italic'>in Christ</hi>,</q> as the element or atmosphere
which surrounds him with its perpetual presence and which constitutes his vital breath;
in fact, this phrase <q><hi rend='italic'>in Christ</hi>,</q> always meaning <q>in union with Christ,</q> is the very key
to Paul's epistles, and to the whole New Testament. The fact that the believer is in
Christ is symbolized in baptism: we are <q><hi rend='italic'>baptized into Christ</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 3:27</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Christ is said to be in the believer.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 14:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I in you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God
dwelleth in you. But if any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his</hi></q>&mdash;that this Spirit of Christ is
Christ himself, is shown from <hi rend='italic'>verse 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the
spirit is life because of righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 2:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I have been crucified with Christ; and it is no longer I that live,
but Christ liveth in me</hi></q>&mdash;here Christ is said to be in the believer, and so to live his life
within the believer, that the latter can point to this as the dominating fact of his
experience,&mdash;it is not so much he that lives, as it is Christ that lives in him. The fact
that Christ is in the believer is symbolized in the Lord's supper: <q><hi rend='italic'>The bread which we break,
is it not a participation in the body of Christ?</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:16</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The Father and the Son dwell in the believer.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 14:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If a man love me, he will keep my word: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto
him, and make our abode with him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the
words that I say unto you I speak not from myself: but the Father abiding in me doeth his works</hi></q>&mdash;the Father
and the Son dwell in the believer; for where the Son is, there always the Father must
be also. If the union between the believer and Christ in <hi rend='italic'>John 14:23</hi> is to be interpreted
as one of mere moral influence, then the union of Christ and the Father in <hi rend='italic'>John 14:10</hi>
must also be interpreted as a union of mere moral influence. <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 3:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that Christ may
dwell in your hearts through faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 4:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that abideth in love abideth in God, and God abideth in him.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The believer has life by partaking of Christ, as Christ has life by
partaking of the Father.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 6:53, 56, 57</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have not life in yourselves
.... He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood abideth in me, and I in him. As the living Father sent me
and I live because of the Father, so he that eateth me, he also shall live because of me</hi></q>&mdash;the believer has life
by partaking of Christ in a way that may not inappropriately be compared with
Christ's having life by partaking of the Father. <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:16, 17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not a communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not a communion of the body of
Christ?</hi></q>&mdash;here it is intimated that the Lord's Supper sets forth, in the language of symbol,
<pb n='798'/><anchor id='Pg798'/>
the soul's actual participation in the life of Christ; and the margin properly
translates the word κοινωνία, not <q>communion,</q> but <q><emph>participation</emph>.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 John 1:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>our
fellowship (κοινωνία) is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.</hi></q> Foster, Christian Life and
Theology, 216&mdash;<q>In <hi rend='italic'>John 6</hi>, the phrases call to mind the ancient form of sacrifice, and
the participation therein by the offerer at the sacrificial meal,&mdash;as at the Passover.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) All believers are one in Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 17:21-23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that they may all be one; even as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be in
us: that the world may believe that thou didst send me. And the glory which thou hast given me I have given unto
them; that they may be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be perfected into one</hi></q>&mdash;all
believers are one in Christ, to whom they are severally and collectively united, as
Christ himself is one with God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) The believer is made partaker of the divine nature.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 1:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that through these</hi> [promises] <hi rend='italic'>ye may become partakers of the divine nature</hi></q>&mdash;not by
having the essence of your humanity changed into the essence of divinity, but by
having Christ the divine Savior continually dwelling within, and indissolubly joined
to, your human souls.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) The believer is made one spirit with the Lord.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 6:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit</hi></q>&mdash;human nature is so interpenetrated
and energized by the divine, that the two move and act as one; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>know ye not that
your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye have from God?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Spirit also
helpeth our infirmity: for we know not how to pray as we ought; but the Spirit himself maketh intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be uttered</hi></q>&mdash;the Spirit is so near to us, and so one with us, that
our prayer is called his, or rather, his prayer becomes ours. Weiss, in his Life of Jesus,
says that, in the view of Scripture, human greatness does not consist in a man's producing
everything in a natural way out of himself, but in possessing perfect receptivity
for God's greatest gift. Therefore God's Son receives the Spirit without measure;
and we may add that the believer in like manner receives Christ.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Nature of this Union.</head>

<p>
We have here to do not only with a fact of life, but with a unique relation
between the finite and the infinite. Our descriptions must therefore
be inadequate. Yet in many respects we know what this union is not; in
certain respects we can positively characterize it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It should not surprise us if we find it far more difficult to give a scientific definition
of this union, than to determine the fact of its existence. It is a fact of life with
which we have to deal; and the secret of life, even in its lowest forms, no philosopher
has ever yet discovered. The tiniest flower witnesses to two facts: first, that of its
own relative independence, as an individual organism; and secondly, that of its ultimate
dependence upon a life and power not its own. So every human soul has its
proper powers of intellect, affection, and will; yet it lives, moves, and has its being in
God (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 17:28</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Starting out from the truth of God's omnipresence, it might seem as if God's indwelling
in the granite boulder was the last limit of his union with the finite. But we see
the divine intelligence and goodness drawing nearer to us, by successive stages, in
vegetable life, in the animal creation, and in the moral nature of man. And yet there
are two stages beyond all these: first, in Christ's union with the believer; and secondly,
in God's union with Christ. If this union of God with the believer be only one
of several approximations of God to his finite creation, the fact that it is, equally with
the others, not wholly comprehensible to reason, should not blind us either to its truth
or to its importance.
</p>

<p>
It is easier to-day than at any other previous period of history to believe in the union
of the believer with Christ. That God is immanent in the universe, and that there is a
divine element in man, is familiar to our generation. All men are naturally one with
Christ, the immanent God, and this natural union prepares the way for that spiritual
union in which Christ joins himself to our faith. Campbell, The Indwelling Christ, 131&mdash;<q>In
the immanence of Christ in nature we find the ground of his immanence in
human nature.... A man may be out of Christ, but Christ is never out of him. Those
who banish him he does not abandon.</q> John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 2:233-256&mdash;<q>God
<pb n='799'/><anchor id='Pg799'/>
is united with nature, in the atoms, in the trees, in the planets. Science is
seeing nature full of the life of God. God is united to man in body and soul. The
beating of his heart and the voice of conscience witness to God within. God sleeps in
the stone, dreams in the animal, wakes in man.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
A. Negatively.&mdash;It is not:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) A merely natural union, like that of God with all human spirits,&mdash;as
held by rationalists.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In our physical life we are conscious of another life within us which is not subject to
our wills: the heart beats involuntarily, whether we sleep or wake. But in our spiritual
life we are still more conscious of a life within our life. Even the heathen said:
<q>Est Deus in nobis; agitante calescimus illo,</q> and the Egyptians held to the identification
of the departed with Osiris (Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 185). But Paul urges
us to work out our salvation, upon the very ground that <q><hi rend='italic'>it is God that worketh</hi></q> in us,
<q><hi rend='italic'>both to will and to work, for his good pleasure</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:12, 13</hi>). This life of God in the soul is the
life of Christ.
</p>

<p>
The movement of the electric car cannot be explained simply from the working of
its own motor apparatus. The electric current throbbing through the wire, and the
dynamo from which that energy proceeds, are needed to explain the result. In like
manner we need a spiritual Christ to explain the spiritual activity of the Christian.
A. H. Strong, Sermon before the Baptist World Congress in London, 1905&mdash;<q>We had
in America some years ago a steam engine all whose working parts were made of glass.
The steam came from without, but, being hot enough to move machinery, this steam
was itself invisible, and there was presented the curious spectacle of an engine, transparent,
moving, and doing important work, while yet no cause for this activity was
perceptible. So the church, humanity, the universe, are all in constant and progressive
movement, but the Christ who moves them is invisible. Faith comes to believe where
it cannot see. It joins itself to this invisible Christ, and knows him as its very life.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) A merely moral union, or union of love and sympathy, like that
between teacher and scholar, friend and friend,&mdash;as held by Socinians
and Arminians.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There is a moral union between different souls: <hi rend='italic'>1 Sam. 18:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the soul of Jonathan was knit
with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul</hi></q>&mdash;here the Vulgate has: <q>Anima Jonathæ
agglutinata Davidi.</q> Aristotle calls friends <q>one soul.</q> So in a higher sense, in
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 4:32</hi>, the early believers are said to have been <q><hi rend='italic'>of one heart and soul</hi>.</q> But in <hi rend='italic'>John 17:21,
26</hi>, Christ's union with his people is distinguished from any mere union of love and
sympathy: <q><hi rend='italic'>that they may all be one; even as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be in us;...
that the love wherewith thou lovedst me may be in them, and I in them</hi>.</q> Jesus' aim, in the whole of
his last discourse, is to show that no mere union of love and sympathy will be sufficient:
<q><hi rend='italic'>apart from me</hi>,</q> he says, <q><hi rend='italic'>ye can do nothing</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 15:5</hi>). That his disciples may be
vitally joined to himself, is therefore the subject of his last prayer.
</p>

<p>
Dorner says well, that Arminianism (and with this doctrine Roman Catholics and the
advocates of New School views substantially agree) makes man a mere tangent to the
circle of the divine nature. It has no idea of the interpenetration of the one by the
other. But the Lutheran Formula of Concord says much more correctly: <q>Damnamus
sententiam quod non Deus ipse, sed dona Dei duntaxat, in credentibus habitent.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ritschl presents to us a historical Christ, and Pfleiderer presents to us an ideal
Christ, but neither one gives us the living Christ who is the present spiritual life of the
believer. Wendt, in his Teaching of Jesus, 2:310, comes equally far short of a serious
interpretation of our Lord's promise, when he says: <q>This union to his person, as to
its contents, is nothing else than adherence to the message of the kingdom of God
brought by him.</q> It is not enough for me to be merely <emph>in touch</emph> with Christ. He
must come to be <q>not so far as even to be near.</q> Tennyson, The Higher Pantheism:
<q>Closer is he than breathing, and nearer than hands or feet.</q> William Watson, The
Unknown God: <q>Yea, in my flesh his Spirit doth flow, Too near, too far, for me to
know.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) A union of essence, which destroys the distinct personality and subsistence
of either Christ or the human spirit,&mdash;as held by many of the
mystics.
</p>

<pb n='800'/><anchor id='Pg800'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Many of the mystics, as Schwenkfeld, Weigel, Sebastian Frank, held to an <emph>essential</emph>
union between Christ and the believer. One of Weigel's followers, therefore, could say
to another: <q>I am Christ Jesus, the living Word of God; I have redeemed thee by my
sinless sufferings.</q> We are ever to remember that the indwelling of Christ only puts
the believer more completely in possession of himself, and makes him more conscious
of his own personality and power. Union with Christ must be taken in connection
with the other truth of the personality and activity of the Christian; otherwise it
tends to pantheism. Martineau, Study, 2:190&mdash;<q>In nature it is God's immanent life, in
morals it is God's transcendent life, with which we commune.</q>
</p>

<p>
Angelus Silesius, a German philosophical poet (1624-1677), audaciously wrote: <q>I
know God cannot live an instant without me; He must give up the ghost, if I should
cease to be.</q> Lowde, a disciple of Malebranche, used the phrase <q>Godded with God,
and Christed with Christ,</q> and Jonathan Edwards, in his Religious Affections, quotes
it with disapprobation, saying that <q>the saints do not become actually partakers of the
divine essence, as would be inferred from this abominable and blasphemous language
of heretics</q> (Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 224). <q>Self is not a mode of the divine: it is a
principle of isolation. In order to religion, I must have a will to surrender.... <q>Our
wills are ours, to make them thine.</q>... Though the self is, in <emph>knowledge</emph>, a principle of
unification; in <emph>existence</emph>, or metaphysically, it is a principle of isolation</q> (Seth).
</p>

<p>
Inge, Christian Mysticism, 30&mdash;<q>Some of the mystics went astray by teaching a real
<emph>substitution</emph> of the divine for human nature, thus depersonalizing man&mdash;a fatal mistake,
for without human personality we cannot conceive of divine personality.</q> Lyman
Abbott: <q>In Christ, God and man are united, not as the river is united with the sea,
losing its personality therein, but as the child is united with the father, or the wife with
the husband, whose personality and individuality are strengthened and increased by
the union.</q> Here Dr. Abbott's view comes as far short of the truth as that of the
mystics goes beyond the truth. As we shall see, the union of the believer with Christ
is a vital union, surpassing in its intimacy any union of souls that we know. The union
of child with father, or of wife with husband, is only a pointer which hints very
imperfectly at the interpenetrating and energizing of the human spirit by the divine.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) A union mediated and conditioned by participation of the sacraments
of the church,&mdash;as held by Romanists, Lutherans, and High-Church
Episcopalians.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Perhaps the most pernicious misinterpretation of the nature of this union is that
which conceives of it as a physical and material one, and which rears upon this basis the
fabric of a sacramental and external Christianity. It is sufficient here to say that this
union cannot be mediated by sacraments, since sacraments presuppose it as already
existing; both Baptism and the Lord's Supper are designed only for believers. Only
faith receives and retains Christ; and faith is the act of the soul grasping what is purely
invisible and supersensible: not the act of the body, submitting to Baptism or partaking
of the Supper.
</p>

<p>
William Lincoln: <q>The only way for the believer, if he wants to go rightly, is to
remember that truth is always two-sided. If there is any truth that the Holy Spirit
has specially pressed upon your heart, if you do not want to push it to the extreme,
ask what is the counter-truth, and lean a little of your weight upon that; otherwise, if
you bear so very much on one side of the truth, there is a danger of pushing it into a
heresy. Heresy means selected truth; it does not mean error; heresy and error are
very different things. Heresy is truth, but truth pushed into undue importance, to the
disparagement of the truth upon the other side.</q> Heresy (αἵρεσις) = an act of choice,
the picking and choosing of a part, instead of comprehensively embracing the whole
of truth. Sacramentarians substitute the symbol for the thing symbolized.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Positively.&mdash;It is:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) An organic union,&mdash;in which we become members of Christ and
partakers of his humanity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Kant defines an organism, as that whose parts are reciprocally means and end. The
body is an organism; since the limbs exist for the heart, and the heart for the limbs. So
each member of Christ's body lives for him who is the head; and Christ the head equally
lives for his members: <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 5:29, 30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>no man ever hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it,
<pb n='801'/><anchor id='Pg801'/>
even as Christ also the church; because we are members of his body</hi>.</q> The train-despatcher is a symbol
of the concentration of energy; the switchmen and conductors who receive his orders
are symbols of the localization of force; but it is all one organic system.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) A vital union,&mdash;in which Christ's life becomes the dominating principle
within us.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This union is a vital one, in distinction from any union of mere juxtaposition or
external influence. Christ does not work upon us from without, as one separated from
us, but from within, as the very heart from which the life-blood of our spirits flows.
See <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 2:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>it is no longer I that live, but Christ liveth in me: and that life which I now live in the flesh I live
in faith, the faith which is in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself up for me;</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Col 3:3, 4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For ye
died, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall be manifested, then shall ye also with
him be manifested in glory.</hi></q> Christ's life is not corrupted by the corruption of his members,
any more than the ray of light is defiled by the filth with which it comes in contact.
We may be unconscious of this union with Christ, as we often are of the circulation of
the blood, yet it may be the very source and condition of our life.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) A spiritual union,&mdash;that is, a union whose source and author is the
Holy Spirit.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
By a spiritual union we mean a union not of body but of spirit,&mdash;a union, therefore,
which only the Holy Spirit originates and maintains. <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:9, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye are not in the flesh but
in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. But if any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
of his. And if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the spirit is life because of righteousness.</hi></q> The
indwelling of Christ involves a continual exercise of efficient power. In <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 3:16, 17</hi>,
<q><hi rend='italic'>strengthened with power through his Spirit in the inward man</hi></q> is immediately followed by <q><hi rend='italic'>that Christ
may dwell in your hearts through faith</hi>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) An indissoluble union,&mdash;that is, a union which, consistently with
Christ's promise and grace, can never be dissolved.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 10:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they shall never perish,
and no one shall snatch them out of my hand</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:35, 39</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?...
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 4:14, 17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>them also that are fallen asleep in Jesus will God bring with him ...
then we that are alive, that are left, shall together with them be caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air:
and so shall we ever be with the Lord.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Christ's omnipresence makes it possible for him to be united to, and to be present in,
each believer, as perfectly and fully as if that believer were the only one to receive
Christ's fulness. As Christ's omnipresence makes the whole Christ present in every
place, each believer has the whole Christ with him, as his source of strength, purity,
life; so that each may say: Christ gives all his time and wisdom and care to me. Such
a union as this lacks every element of instability. Once formed, the union is indissoluble.
Many of the ties of earth are rudely broken,&mdash;not so with our union with
Christ,&mdash;that endures forever.
</p>

<p>
Since there is now an unchangeable and divine element in us, our salvation depends
no longer upon our unstable wills, but upon Christ's purpose and power. By temporary
declension from duty, or by our causeless unbelief, we may banish Christ to the barest
and most remote room of the soul's house; but he does not suffer us wholly to exclude
him; and when we are willing to unbar the doors, he is still there, ready to fill the
whole mansion with his light and love.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) An inscrutable union,&mdash;mystical, however, only in the sense of surpassing
in its intimacy and value any other union of souls which we know.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This union is inscrutable, indeed; but it is not mystical, in the sense of being unintelligible
to the Christian or beyond the reach of his experience. If we call it mystical at
all, it should be only because, in the intimacy of its communion and in the transforming
power of its influence, it surpasses any other union of souls that we know, and so
cannot be fully described or understood by earthly analogies. <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 5:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>This mystery is
great: but I speak in regard of Christ and of the church</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 1:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the riches of the glory of this mystery among
the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
See Diman, Theistic Argument, 380&mdash;<q>As physical science has brought us to the conclusion
that back of all the phenomena of the material universe there lies an invisible
universe of forces, and that these forces may ultimately be reduced to one all-pervading
<pb n='802'/><anchor id='Pg802'/>
force in which the unity of the physical universe consists; and as philosophy has
advanced the rational conjecture that this ultimate all-pervading force is simply will-force;
so the great Teacher holds up to us the spiritual universe as pervaded by one
omnipotent life&mdash;a life which was revealed in him as its highest manifestation, but
which is shared by all who by faith become partakers of his nature. He was Son of
God: they too had power to become sons of God. The incarnation is wholly within
the natural course and tendency of things. It was prepared for, it came, in the fulness
of times. Christ's life is not something sporadic and individual, having its source in
the personal conviction of each disciple; it implies a real connection with Christ, the
head. Behind all nature there is one force; behind all varieties of Christian life and
character there is one spiritual power. All nature is not inert matter,&mdash;it is pervaded
by a living presence. So all the body of believers live by virtue of the all-working
Spirit of Christ, the Holy Ghost.</q> An epitaph at Silton, in Dorsetshire, reads: <q>Here
lies a piece of Christ&mdash;a star in dust, A vein of gold, a china dish, that must Be used in
heaven when God shall feed the just.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. H. Strong, in Examiner, 1880: <q>Such is the nature of union with Christ,&mdash;such I
mean, is the nature of every believer's union with Christ. For, whether he knows it or
not, every Christian has entered into just such a partnership as this. It is this and this
only which constitutes him a Christian, and which makes possible a Christian church.
We may, indeed, be thus united to Christ, without being fully conscious of the real
nature of our relation to him. We may actually possess the kernel, while as yet we
have regard only to the shell; we may seem to ourselves to be united to Christ only by
an external bond, while after all it is an inward and spiritual bond that makes us his.
God often reveals to the Christian the mystery of the gospel, which is Christ <emph>in</emph> him the
hope of glory, at the very time that he is seeking only some nearer access to a Redeemer
outside of him. Trying to find a union of coöperation or of sympathy, he is amazed to
learn that there is already established a union with Christ more glorious and blessed,
namely, a union of life; and so, like the miners in the Rocky Mountains, while he is
looking only for silver, he finds gold. Christ and the believer have the same life. They
are not separate persons linked together by some temporary bond of friendship,&mdash;they
are united by a tie as close and indissoluble as if the same blood ran in their veins. Yet
the Christian may never have suspected how intimate a union he has with his Savior;
and the first understanding of this truth may be the gateway through which he passes
into a holier and happier stage of the Christian life.</q>
</p>

<p>
So the Way leads, through the Truth, to the Life (<hi rend='italic'>John 14:6</hi>). Apprehension of an
external Savior prepares for the reception and experience of the internal Savior.
Christ is first the Door of the sheep, but in him, after they have once entered in, they
find pasture (<hi rend='italic'>John 10:7-9</hi>). On the nature of this union, see H. B. Smith, System of
Christian Theology, 531-539; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 601; Wilberforce, Incarnation,
208-272, and New Birth of Man's Nature, 1-30. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Park, Discourses, 117-136.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Consequences of this Union as respects the Believer.</head>

<p>
We have seen that Christ's union with humanity, at the incarnation,
involved him in all the legal liabilities of the race to which he united himself,
and enabled him so to assume the penalty of its sin as to make for all
men a full satisfaction to the divine justice, and to remove all external
obstacles to man's return to God. An internal obstacle, however, still
remains&mdash;the evil affections and will, and the consequent guilt, of the
individual soul. This last obstacle also Christ removes, in the case of all
his people, by uniting himself to them in a closer and more perfect manner
than that in which he is united to humanity at large. As Christ's union
with the race secures the objective reconciliation of the race to God, so
Christ's union with believers secures the subjective reconciliation of
believers to God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In Baird, Elohim Revealed, 607-610, in Owen, on Justification, chap. 8, in Boston,
Covenant of Grace, chap. 2, and in Dale, Atonement, 265-440, the union of the believer
with Christ is made to explain the bearing of our sins by Christ. As we have seen in
our discussion of the Atonement, however (page 759), this explains the cause by the
effect, and implies that Christ died only for the elect (see review of Dale, in Brit. Quar.
<pb n='803'/><anchor id='Pg803'/>
Rev., Apr. 1876:221-225). It is not the union of Christ with the believer, but the union
of Christ with humanity at large, that explains his taking upon him human guilt and
penalty.
</p>

<p>
Amnesty offered to a rebellious city may be complete, yet it may avail only for those
who surrender. Pardon secured from a Governor, upon the ground of the services of
an Advocate, may be effectual only when the convict accepts it,&mdash;there is no hope for
him when he tears up the pardon. Dr. H. E. Robins: <q>The judicial declaration of
acquittal on the ground of the death of Christ, which comes to all men (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:18</hi>), and
into the benefits of which they are introduced by natural birth, is inchoate justification,
and will become perfected justification through the new birth of the Holy Spirit,
unless the working of this divine agent is resisted by the personal moral action of those
who are lost.</q> What Dr. Robins calls <q>inchoate justification</q> we prefer to call <q>ideal
justification</q> or <q>attainable justification.</q> Humanity in Christ is justified, and every
member of the race who joins himself to Christ by faith participates in Christ's justification.
H. E. Dudley: <q>Adam's sin holds us all down just as gravity holds all, while
Christ's righteousness, though secured for all and accessible to all, involves an effort of
will in climbing and grasping which not all will make.</q> Justification in Christ is the
birthright of humanity; but, in order to possess and enjoy it, each of us must claim
and appropriate it by faith.
</p>

<p>
R. W. Dale, Fellowship with Christ, 7&mdash;<q>When we were created in Christ, the fortunes
of the human race for good or evil became his. The Incarnation revealed and
fulfilled the relations which already existed between the Son of God and mankind.
From the beginning Christ had entered into fellowship with us. When we sinned, he
remained in fellowship with us still. Our miseries</q> [we would add: our guilt] <q>were
his, by his own choice.... His fellowship with us is the foundation of our fellowship
with him.... When I have discovered that by the very constitution of my nature
I am to achieve perfection in the power of the life of Another&mdash;who is yet not Another,
but the very ground of my being&mdash;it ceases to be incredible to me that Another&mdash;who
is yet not Another&mdash;should be the Atonement for my sin, and that his relation to God
should determine mine.</q>
</p>

<p>
A tract entitled <q>The Seven Togethers</q> sums up the Scripture testimony with
regard to the Consequences of the believer's Union with Christ: 1. Crucified together
with Christ&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 2:20</hi>&mdash;συνεσταύρωμαι. 2. Died together with Christ&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:20</hi>&mdash;ἀπεθάνετε.
3. Buried together with Christ&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:4</hi>&mdash;συνετάφημεν. 4. Quickened together with
Christ&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:5</hi>&mdash;συνεζωοποίησεν. 5. Raised together with Christ&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Col. 3:1</hi>&mdash;συνηγέρθητε.
6. Sufferers together with Christ&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:17</hi>&mdash;συμπάσχομεν. 7. Glorified together with
Christ&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:17</hi>&mdash;συνδοξασθῶμεν. Union with Christ results in common sonship, relation
to God, character, influence, and destiny.
</p>

<p>
Imperfect apprehension of the believer's union with Christ works to the great injury
of Christian doctrine. An experience of union with Christ first enables us to understand
the death of sin and separation from God which has befallen the race sprung
from the first Adam. The life and liberty of the children of God in Christ Jesus shows
us by contrast how far astray we had gone. The vital and organic unity of the new
race sprung from the second Adam reveals the depravity and disintegration which we
had inherited from our first father. We see that as there is one source of spiritual life
in Christ, so there was one source of corrupt life in Adam; and that as we are justified
by reason of our oneness with the justified Christ, so we are condemned by reason of
our oneness with the condemned Adam.
</p>

<p>
A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 175&mdash;<q>If it is consistent with evolution that the
physical and natural life of the race should be derived from a single source, then it is
equally consistent with evolution that the moral and spiritual life of the race should
be derived from a single source. Scripture is stating only scientific fact when it sets
the second Adam, the head of redeemed humanity, over against the first Adam, the
head of fallen humanity. We are told that evolution should give us many Christs.
We reply that evolution has not given us many Adams. Evolution, as it assigns to the
natural head of the race a supreme and unique position, must be consistent with itself,
and must assign a supreme and unique position to Jesus Christ, the spiritual head of
the race. As there was but one Adam from whom all the natural life of the race was
derived, so that there can be but one Christ from whom all the spiritual life of the
race is derived.</q>
</p>

</quote>
<p>
The consequences of union with Christ may be summarily stated as
follows:
</p>

<pb n='804'/><anchor id='Pg804'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Union with Christ involves a change in the dominant affection of
the soul. Christ's entrance into the soul makes it a new creature, in the
sense that the ruling disposition, which before was sinful, now becomes
holy. This change we call <emph>Regeneration</emph>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus made me free from the law of sin and of death</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor.
5:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if any man is in Christ, he is a new creature</hi></q> (marg.&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>there is a new creation</hi></q>); <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 1:15, 16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>it
was the good pleasure of God ... to reveal his Son in me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus for good works.</hi></q> As we derive our old nature from the first man Adam, by birth,
so we derive a new nature from the second man Christ, by the new birth. Union with
Christ is the true <q>transfusion of blood.</q> <q>The death-struck sinner, like the wan,
anæmic, dying invalid, is saved by having poured into his veins the healthier blood of
Christ</q> (Drummond, Nat. Law in the Spir. World). God regenerates the soul by uniting
it to Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
In the Johnston Harvester Works at Batavia, when they paint their machinery, they
do it by immersing part after part in a great tank of paint,&mdash;so the painting is instantaneous
and complete. Our baptism into Christ is the outward picture of an inward
immersion of the soul not only into his love and fellowship, but into his very life, so
that in him we become new creatures (<hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:17</hi>). As Miss Sullivan surrounded Helen
Keller with the influence of her strong personality, by intelligence and sympathy and
determination striving to awaken the blind and dumb soul and give it light and love,
so Jesus envelops us. But his Spirit is more encompassing and more penetrating than
any human influence however powerful, because his life is the very ground and principle
of our being.
</p>

<p>
Tennyson: <q>O for a man to arise in me, That the man that I am may cease to be!</q>
Emerson: <q>Himself from God he could not free; He builded better than he knew.</q>
Religion is not the adding of a new department of activity as an adjunct to our own
life or the grafting of a new method of manifestation upon the old. It is rather the
grafting of our souls into Christ, so that his life dominates and manifests itself in all
our activities. The magnet which left to itself can lift only a three pound weight,
will lift three hundred when it is attached to the electric dynamo. Expositor's Greek
Testament on <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:45, 46</hi>&mdash;<q>The action of Jesus in <q><emph>breathing</emph></q> upon his disciples while
he said, <q><hi rend='italic'>Receive the Holy Spirit</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 20:22</hi> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) symbolized the vitalizing relationship which
at this epoch he assumed towards mankind; this act raised to a higher potency the
original <q><emph>breathing</emph></q> of God by which <q><hi rend='italic'>man became a living soul</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gen. 2:7</hi>).</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Union with Christ involves a new exercise of the soul's powers in
repentance and faith; faith, indeed, is the act of the soul by which, under
the operation of God, Christ is received. This new exercise of the soul's
powers we call <emph>Conversion</emph> (Repentance and Faith). It is the obverse or
human side of Regeneration.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 3:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 3:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the sacred writings which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.</hi></q> Faith is the soul's laying hold
of Christ as its only source of life, pardon, and salvation. And so we see what true
religion is. It is not a moral life; it is not a determination to be religious; it is not
faith, if by faith we mean an external trust that somehow Christ will save us; it is
nothing less than the life of the soul in God, through Christ his Son. To Christ then
we are to look for the origin, continuance and increase of our faith (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 17:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>said
unto the Lord, Increase our faith</hi></q>). Our faith is but a part of <q><hi rend='italic'>his fulness</hi></q> of which <q><hi rend='italic'>we all received,
and grace for grace</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 1:16</hi>).
</p>

<p>
A. H. Strong, Sermon before the Baptist World Congress, London, 1905&mdash;<q rend='pre'>Christianity
is summed up in the two facts: Christ <emph>for</emph> us, and Christ <emph>in</emph> us&mdash;Christ <emph>for</emph> us upon
the Cross, revealing the eternal opposition of holiness to sin, and yet, through God's
eternal suffering for sin making objective atonement for us; and Christ <emph>in</emph> us by his
Spirit, renewing in us the lost image of God, and abiding in us as the all-sufficient
source of purity and power. Here are the two foci of the Christian ellipse: Christ
<emph>for</emph> us, who redeemed us from the curse of the law by being made a curse for us, and
Christ <emph>in</emph> us, the hope of glory, whom the apostle calls the mystery of the gospel.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We need Christ <emph>in</emph> us as well as Christ <emph>for</emph> us. How shall I, how shall society, find healing
and purification within? Let me answer by reminding you of what they did at Chicago.
In all the world there was no river more stagnant and fetid than was Chicago River.
<pb n='805'/><anchor id='Pg805'/>
Its sluggish stream received the sweepings of the watercraft and the offal of the city,
and there was no current to carry the detritus away. There it settled, and bred
miasma and fever. At last it was suggested that, by cutting through the low ridge
between the city and the Desplaines River, the current could be set running in the
opposite direction, and drainage could be secured into the Illinois River and the great
Mississippi. At a cost of fifteen millions of dollars the cut was made, and now all the
water of Lake Michigan can be relied upon to cleanse that turbid stream. What Chicago
River could never do for itself, the great lake now does for it. So no human soul
can purge itself of its sin; and what the individual cannot do, humanity at large is
powerless to accomplish. Sin has dominion over us, and we are foul to the very depths
of our being, until with the help of God we break through the barrier of our self-will,
and let the floods of Christ's purifying life flow into us. Then, in an hour, more is
done to renew, than all our efforts for years had effected. Thus humanity is saved,
individual by individual, not by philosophy, or philanthropy, or self-development, or
self-reformation, but simply by joining itself to Jesus Christ, and by being filled in
Him with all the fulness of God.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Union with Christ gives to the believer the legal standing and rights
of Christ. As Christ's union with the race involves atonement, so the
believer's union with Christ involves <emph>Justification</emph>. The believer is entitled
to take for his own all that Christ is, and all that Christ has done; and
this because he has within him that new life of humanity which suffered in
Christ's death and rose from the grave in Christ's resurrection,&mdash;in other
words, because he is virtually one person with the Redeemer. In Christ
the believer is prophet, priest, and king.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 13:39</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>by him</hi> [lit.: <q><hi rend='italic'>in him</hi></q> = in union with him] <hi rend='italic'>every one that believeth is justified</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom.
6:7, 8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that hath died is justified from sin ... we died with Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>7:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>dead to the law through the
body of Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>8:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>heirs of God, and joint-heirs
with Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But of him ye are in Christ Jesus, who was made unto us wisdom from God, and righteousness</hi>
[justification]</q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:21, 23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>all things are yours ... and ye are Christ's</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>6:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye were
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Spirit of our God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>we thus judge, that one
died for all, therefore all died</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Him who knew no sin he made to be sin on our behalf; that we might become
the righteousness</hi> [justification] <hi rend='italic'>of God in him</hi></q> = God's justified persons, in union with Christ
(see pages 760, 761).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 2:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I have been crucified with Christ; and it is no longer I that live, but Christ liveth in me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:4,
6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>chose us in him ... to the praise of the glory of his grace, which he freely bestowed on us in the Beloved</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>2:5, 6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>even when we were dead through our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ ... made us to sit
with him in the heavenly places, in Christ Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:8, 9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that I may gain Christ, and be found in him, not
having a righteousness of mine own, even that which is of the law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness
which is from God by faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 2:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Faithful is the saying: For if we died with him, we shall also
live with him.</hi></q> Prophet: <hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Holy Spirit shall teach you in that very hour what ye ought to
say</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 2:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye have an anointing from the Holy One, and ye know all things.</hi></q> Priest: <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 2:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>a
holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they shall be
priests of God and of Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 2:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>a royal priesthood.</hi></q> King: <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 3:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that overcometh, I will
give to him to sit down with me in my throne</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>madest them to be unto our God a kingdom and priests.</hi></q>
The connection of justification and union with Christ delivers the former from the
charge of being a mechanical and arbitrary procedure. As Jonathan Edwards has
said: <q>The justification of the believer is no other than his being admitted to communion
in, or participation of, this head and surety of all believers.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Union with Christ secures to the believer the continuously transforming,
assimilating power of Christ's life,&mdash;first, for the soul; secondly,
for the body,&mdash;consecrating it in the present, and in the future raising it
up in the likeness of Christ's glorified body. This continuous influence,
so far as it is exerted in the present life, we call <emph>Sanctification</emph>, the human
side or aspect of which is <emph>Perseverance</emph>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For the soul: <hi rend='italic'>John 1:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>of his fulness we all received, and grace for grace</hi></q>&mdash;successive and
increasing measures of grace, corresponding to the soul's successive and increasing
needs; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the spirit is life because of righteousness</hi></q>;
<pb n='806'/><anchor id='Pg806'/>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:45</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The last Adam became a life-giving spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Have this mind in you, which
was also in Christ Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 3:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if he shall be manifested, we shall be like him.</hi></q> <q>Can Christ let
the believer fall out of his hands? No, for the believer is his hands.</q>
</p>

<p>
For the body: <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 6:17-20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit ... know ye not that your
body is a temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you ... glorify God therefore in your body</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Thess. 5:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And
the God of peace himself sanctify you wholly; and may your spirit and soul and body be preserved entire, without
blame at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>shall give life also to your mortal bodies through his
Spirit that dwelleth in you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:49</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as we have borne the image of the earthy</hi> [man], <hi rend='italic'>we shall also bear
the image of the heavenly</hi> [man]</q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:20, 21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For our citizenship is in heaven; from whence also we wait
for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be conformed to
the body of his glory, according to the working whereby he is able even to subject all things unto himself.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Is there a physical miracle wrought for the drunkard in his regeneration? Mr.
Moody says, Yes; Mr. Gough says, No. We prefer to say that the change is a spiritual
one; but that the <q>expulsive power of a new affection</q> indirectly affects the body, so
that old appetites sometimes disappear in a moment; and that often, in the course of
years, great changes take place even in the believer's body. Tennyson, Idylls: <q>Have
ye looked at Edyrn? Have ye seen how nobly changed? This work of his is great and
wonderful; His very face with change of heart is changed.</q> <q>Christ in the soul
fashions the germinal man into his own likeness,&mdash;this is the embryology of the new
life. The cardinal error in religious life is the attempt to live without proper environment</q>
(see Drummond, Natural Law in Spiritual World, 253-284). Human life from
Adam does not stand the test,&mdash;only divine-human life in Christ can secure us from
falling. This is the work of Christ, now that he has ascended and taken to himself his
power, namely, to give his life more and more fully to the church, until it shall grow
up in all things into him, the Head, and shall fitly express his glory to the world.
</p>

<p>
As the accomplished organist discloses unsuspected capabilities of his instrument, so
Christ brings into activity all the latent powers of the human soul. <q>I was five years
in the ministry,</q> said an American preacher, <q>before I realized that my Savior is
alive.</q> Dr. R. W. Dale has left on record the almost unutterable feelings that stirred
his soul when he first realized this truth; see Walker, The Spirit and the Incarnation,
preface, v. Many have struggled in vain against sin until they have admitted Christ
to their hearts,&mdash;then they could say: <q><hi rend='italic'>this is the victory that hath overcome the world, even our faith</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>1 John 5:4</hi>). <q>Go out, God will go in; Die thou, and let him live; Be not, and he will
be; Wait, and he'll all things give.</q> The best way to get air out of a vessel is to
pour water in. Only in Christ can we find our pardon, peace, purity, and power. He is
<q><hi rend='italic'>made unto us wisdom from God, and justification and sanctification, and redemption</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:30</hi>). A medical
man says: <q>The only radical remedy for dipsomania is religiomania</q> (quoted in
William James, Varieties of Religious Experience, 268). It is easy to break into an
empty house; the spirit cast out returns, finds the house empty, brings seven others,
and <q><hi rend='italic'>the last state of that man becometh worse than the first</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 12:45</hi>). There is no safety in simply
expelling sin; we need also to bring in Christ; in fact only he can enable us to expel
not only actual sin but the love of it.
</p>

<p>
Alexander McLaren: <q>If we are <q><emph>in Christ</emph>,</q> we are like a diver in his crystal bell, and
have a solid though invisible wall around us, which keeps all sea-monsters off us, and
communicates with the upper air, whence we draw the breath of calm life and can
work in security though in the ocean depths.</q> John Caird, Fund. Ideas, 2:98&mdash;<q>How
do we know that the life of God has not departed from nature? Because every spring
we witness the annual miracle of nature's revival, every summer and autumn the
waving corn. How do we know that Christ has not departed from the world? Because
he imparts to the soul that trusts him a power, a purity, a peace, which are beyond all
that nature can give.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) Union with Christ brings about a fellowship of Christ with the
believer,&mdash;Christ takes part in all the labors, temptations, and sufferings
of his people; a fellowship of the believer with Christ,&mdash;so that Christ's
whole experience on earth is in some measure reproduced in him; a fellowship
of all believers with one another,&mdash;furnishing a basis for the spiritual
unity of Christ's people on earth, and for the eternal communion of heaven.
The doctrine of Union with Christ is therefore the indispensable preparation
for <emph>Ecclesiology</emph>, and for <emph>Eschatology</emph>.
</p>

<pb n='807'/><anchor id='Pg807'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Fellowship of Christ with the believer: <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 4:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I can do all things in him that strengtheneth
me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 4:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For we have not a high priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Is.
63:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>In all their affliction he was afflicted.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 2:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is
able to succor them that are tempted</hi></q> = are being tempted, are under temptation. Bp. Wordsworth:
<q>By his <emph>passion</emph> he acquired <emph>compassion</emph>.</q> <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 2:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>thanks be unto God, who always
leadeth us in triumph in Christ</hi></q> = Christ leads us in triumph, but his triumph is ours, even if
it be a triumph over us. One with him, we participate in his joy and in his sovereignty.
<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 3:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that overcometh, I will give to him to sit down with me in my throne.</hi></q> W. F. Taylor on <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The
Spirit of God dwelleth in you.... if any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his</hi></q>&mdash;<q>Christ
dwells in us, says the apostle. But do we accept him as a resident, or as a ruler?
England was first represented at King Thebau's court by her resident. This official
could rebuke, and even threaten, but no more,&mdash;Thebau was sovereign. Burma knew
no peace, till England ruled. So Christ does not consent to be represented by a mere
resident. He must himself dwell within the soul, and he must reign.</q> Christina
Rossetti, Thee Only: <q>Lord, we are rivers running to thy sea, Our waves and ripples
all derived from thee; A nothing we should have, a nothing be, Except for thee. Sweet
are the waters of thy shoreless sea; Make sweet our waters that make haste to thee;
Pour in thy sweetness, that ourselves may be Sweetness to thee!</q>
</p>

<p>
Of the believer with Christ: <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and
the fellowship of his sufferings, becoming conformed unto his death</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 1:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>fill up on my part that which is
lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the church</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 4:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>partakers of
Christ's sufferings.</hi></q> The Christian reproduces Christ's life in miniature, and, in a true sense,
lives it over again. Only upon the principle of union with Christ can we explain how
the Christian instinctively applies to himself the prophecies and promises which originally
and primarily were uttered with reference to Christ: <q><hi rend='italic'>thou wilt not leave my soul to Sheol;
Neither wilt thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 16:10, 11</hi>). This fellowship is the ground of
the promises made to believing prayer: <hi rend='italic'>John 14:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whatsoever ye shall ask is my name, that will I
do</hi></q>; Westcott, Bib. Com., <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>: <q>The meaning of the phrase [<q><hi rend='italic'>in my name</hi></q>] is <q>as being
one with me even as I am revealed to you.</q> Its two correlatives are <q><hi rend='italic'>in me</hi></q> and the
Pauline <q><hi rend='italic'>in Christ</hi></q>.</q> <q><hi rend='italic'>All things are yours</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 3:21</hi>), because Christ is universal King, and
all believers are exalted to fellowship with him. After the battle of Sedan, King
William asked a wounded Prussian officer whether it were well with him. <q>All is well
where your majesty leads!</q> was the reply. <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For to me to live is Christ, and to die is
gain.</hi></q> Paul indeed uses the words <q>Christ</q> and <q>church</q> as interchangeable terms: <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor.
12:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as the body is one, and hath many members, ... so also is Christ.</hi></q> Denney, Studies in Theology,
171&mdash;<q>There is not in the N. T. from beginning to end, in the record of the
original and genuine Christian life, a single word of despondency or gloom. It is the
most buoyant, exhilarating and joyful book in the world.</q> This is due to the fact that
the writers believe in a living and exalted Christ, and know themselves to be one with
him. They descend crowned into the arena. In the Soudan, every morning for half an
hour before General Gordon's tent there lay a white handkerchief. The most pressing
message, even on matters of life and death, waited till that handkerchief was withdrawn.
It was the signal that Christ and Gordon were in communion with each other.
</p>

<p>
Of all believers with one another: <hi rend='italic'>John 17:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that they may all be one</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>we,
who are many, are one bread, one body: for we all partake of the one bread</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>create in himself of the
two one new man, so making peace</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 1:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that ye also may have fellowship with us: yea, and our fellowship
is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ</hi></q>&mdash;here the word κοινωνία is used. Fellowship
with each other is the effect and result of the fellowship of each with God in Christ.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>John 10:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they shall become one flock, one shepherd</hi></q>; Westcott, Bib. Com., <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>: <q>The
bond of fellowship is shown to lie in the common relation to one Lord.... Nothing
is said of one <q>fold</q> under the new dispensation.</q> Here is a unity, not of external
organization, but of common life. Of this the visible church is the consequence and
expression. But this communion is not limited to earth,&mdash;it is perpetuated beyond
death: <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 4:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>so shall we ever be with the Lord</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 12:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to the general assembly and church of
the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>22</hi>&mdash;the city of God, the new Jerusalem, is the image of perfect society, as well
as of intensity and fulness of life in Christ. The ordinances express the essence of
Ecclesiology&mdash;union with Christ&mdash;for Baptism symbolizes the incorporation of the
believer in Christ, while the Lord's Supper symbolizes the incorporation of Christ in the
believer. Christianity is a social matter, and the true Christian feels the need of being
with and among his brethren. The Romans could not understand why <q>this new sect</q>
must be holding meetings all the time&mdash;even daily meetings. Why could they not go
singly, or in families, to the temples, and make offerings to their God, and then come
<pb n='808'/><anchor id='Pg808'/>
away, as the pagans did? It was this meeting together which exposed them to persecution
and martyrdom. It was the natural and inevitable expression of their union with
Christ and so of their union with one another.
</p>

<p>
The consciousness of union with Christ gives assurance of salvation. It is a great
stimulus to believing prayer and to patient labor. It is a duty to <q><hi rend='italic'>know what is the hope of
his calling, what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what the exceeding greatness of his power
to us-ward who believe</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:18, 19</hi>). Christ's command, <q><hi rend='italic'>Abide in me, and I in you</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 15:4</hi>),
implies that we are both to realize and to confirm this union, by active exertion of our
own wills. We are to abide in him by an entire consecration, and to let him abide in us
by an appropriating faith. We are to give ourselves to Christ, and to take in return the
Christ who gives himself to us,&mdash;in other words, we are to believe Christ's promises and
to act upon them. All sin consists in the sundering of man's life from God, and most
systems of falsehood in religion are attempts to save man without merging his life in
God's once more. The only religion that can save mankind is the religion that fills the
whole heart and the whole life with God, and that aims to interpenetrate universal
humanity with that same living Christ who has already made himself one with the
believer. This consciousness of union with Christ gives <q><emph>boldness</emph></q> (παρρησία&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Acts 4:13</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>1 John 5:14</hi>) toward men and toward God. The word belongs to the Greek democracies.
Freemen are bold. Demosthenes boasts of his frankness. Christ frees us from the hidebound,
introspective, self-conscious spirit. In him we become free, demonstrative,
outspoken. So we find, in John's epistles, that boldness in prayer is spoken of as a
virtue, and the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews urges us to <q><hi rend='italic'>draw near with boldness
unto the throne of grace</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 4:16</hi>). An engagement of marriage is not the same as marriage.
The parties may be still distant from each other. Many Christians get just near enough
to Christ to be engaged to him. This seems to be the experience of Christian in the Pilgrim's
Progress. But our privilege is to have a present Christ, and to do our work not
only <emph>for</emph> him, but <emph>in</emph> him. <q>Since Christ and we are one, Why should we doubt or fear?</q>
<q>We two are so joined, He'll not be in heaven, And leave me behind.</q>
</p>

<p>
We append a few statements with regard to this union and its consequences, from
noted names in theology and the church. Luther: <q>By faith thou art so glued to
Christ that of thee and him there becomes as it were one person, so that with confidence
thou canst say: <q>I am Christ,&mdash;that is, Christ's righteousness, victory, <hi rend='italic'>etc.</hi>, are mine</q>;
and Christ in turn can say: <q>I am that sinner,&mdash;that is, his sins, his death, <hi rend='italic'>etc.</hi>, are mine,
because he clings to me and I to him, for we have been joined through faith into one
flesh and bone.</q></q> Calvin: <q>I attribute the highest importance to the connection
between the head and the members; to the inhabitation of Christ in our hearts; in a
word, to the mystical union by which we enjoy him, so that, being made ours, he makes
us partakers of the blessings with which he is furnished.</q> John Bunyan: <q>The Lord
led me into the knowledge of the mystery of union with Christ, that I was joined to
him, that I was bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. By this also my faith in him as
my righteousness was the more confirmed; for if he and I were one, then his righteousness
was mine, his merits mine, his victory also mine. Now could I see myself in heaven
and on earth at once&mdash;in heaven by my Christ, my risen head, my righteousness and
life, though on earth by my body or person.</q> Edwards: <q>Faith is the soul's active
uniting with Christ. God sees fit that, in order to a union's being established between
two intelligent active beings, there should be the mutual act of both, that each should
receive the other, as entirely joining themselves to one another.</q> Andrew Fuller: <q>I
have no doubt that the imputation of Christ's righteousness presupposes a union with
him; since there is no perceivable fitness in bestowing benefits on one for another's
sake, where there is no union or relation between.</q>
</p>

<p>
See Luther, quoted, with other references, in Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk,
3:325. See also Calvin, Institutes, 1:660; Edwards, Works, 4:66, 69, 70; Andrew Fuller,
Works, 2:685; Pascal, Thoughts, Eng. trans., 429; Hooker, Eccl. Polity, book 5, ch.
56; Tillotson, Sermons, 3:307; Trench, Studies in Gospels, 284, and Christ the True
Vine, in Hulsean Lectures; Schöberlein, in Studien und Kritiken, 1847:7-69; Caird, on
Union with God, in Scotch Sermons, sermon 2; Godet, on the Ultimate Design of Man,
in Princeton Rev., Nov. 1880&mdash;the design is <q>God in man, and man in God</q>; Baird,
Elohim Revealed, 590-617; Upham, Divine Union, Interior Life, Life of Madame Guyon
and Fénelon; A. J. Gordon, In Christ; McDuff, In Christo; J. Denham Smith, Life-truths,
25-98; A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 220-225; Bishop Hall's Treatise on
The Church Mystical; Andrew Murray, Abide in Christ; Stearns, Evidence of Christian
Experience, 145, 174, 179; F. B. Meyer, Christian Living&mdash;essay on Appropriation of
<pb n='809'/><anchor id='Pg809'/>
Christ, <hi rend='italic'>vs.</hi> mere imitation of Christ; Sanday, Epistle to the Romans, supplementary
essay on the Mystic Union; H. B. Smith, System of Theology, 531; J. M. Campbell, The
Indwelling Christ.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Regeneration.</head>

<p>
Regeneration is that act of God by which the governing disposition of
the soul is made holy, and by which, through the truth as a means, the first
holy exercise of this disposition is secured.
</p>

<p>
Regeneration, or the new birth, is the divine side of that change of heart
which, viewed from the human side, we call conversion. It is God's turning
the soul to himself,&mdash;conversion being the soul's turning itself to God,
of which God's turning it is both the accompaniment and cause. It will be
observed from the above definition, that there are two aspects of regeneration,
in the first of which the soul is passive, in the second of which the
soul is active. God changes the governing disposition,&mdash;in this change the
soul is simply acted upon. God secures the initial exercise of this disposition
in view of the truth,&mdash;in this change the soul itself acts. Yet these
two parts of God's operation are simultaneous. At the same moment that
he makes the soul sensitive, he pours in the light of his truth and induces
the exercise of the holy disposition he has imparted.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This distinction between the passive and the active aspects of regeneration is necessitated,
as we shall see, by the twofold method of representing the change in Scripture.
In many passages the change is ascribed wholly to the power of God; the change is a
change in the fundamental disposition of the soul; there is no use of means. In other
passages we find truth referred to as an agency employed by the Holy Spirit, and the
mind acts in view of this truth. The distinction between these two aspects of regeneration
seems to be intimated in <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:5, 6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>made us alive together with Christ,</hi></q> and <q><hi rend='italic'>raised us up
with him</hi>.</q> Lazarus must first be made alive, and in this he could <emph>not</emph> coöperate; but he
must also come forth from the tomb, and in this he <emph>could</emph> be active. In the old photography,
the plate was first made sensitive, and in this the plate was passive; then it was
exposed to the object, and now the plate actively seized upon the rays of light which
the object emitted.
</p>

<p>
Availing ourselves of the illustration from photography, we may compare God's
initial work in the soul to the sensitizing of the plate, his next work to the pouring in
of the light and the production of the picture. The soul is first made receptive to the
truth; then it is enabled actually to receive the truth. But the illustration fails in one
respect,&mdash;it represents the two aspects of regeneration as successive. In regeneration
there is no chronological succession. At the same instant that God makes the soul
sensitive, he also draws out its new sensibility in view of the truth. Let us notice also
that, as in photography the picture however perfect needs to be developed, and this
development takes time, so regeneration is only the beginning of God's work; not all
the dispositions, but only the governing disposition, is made holy; there is still need
that sanctification should follow regeneration; and sanctification is a work of God
which lasts for a whole lifetime. We may add that <q>heredity affects regeneration
as the quality of the film affects photography, and environment affects regeneration as
the focus affects photography</q> (W. T. Thayer).
</p>

<p>
Sacramentarianism has so obscured the doctrine of Scripture that many persons who
gave no evidence of being regenerate are quite convinced that they are Christians. Uncle
John Vassar therefore never asked: <q>Are you a Christian?</q> but always: <q>Have you
ever been born again?</q> E. G. Robinson: <q>The doctrine of regeneration, aside from
sacramentarianism, was not apprehended by Luther or the Reformers, was not indeed
wrought out till Wesley taught that God instantaneously renewed the affections and
the will.</q> We get the doctrine of regeneration mainly from the apostle John, as we
get the doctrine of justification mainly from the apostle Paul. Stevens, Johannine
Theology, 366&mdash;<q>Paul's great words are, justification, and righteousness; John's are,
birth from God, and life. But, for both Paul and John, faith is life-union with Christ.</q>
</p>

<p>
Stearns, Evidence of Christian Experience, 134&mdash;<q>The sinful nature is not gone, but
its power is broken; sin no longer dominates the life; it has been thrust from the centre
<pb n='810'/><anchor id='Pg810'/>
to the circumference; it has the sentence of death in itself; the man is freed, at least in
potency and promise. 218&mdash;An activity may be immediate, yet not unmediated. God's
action on the soul may be through the sense, yet still be immediate, as when finite
spirits communicate with each other.</q> Dubois, in Century Magazine, Dec. 1894:233&mdash;<q>Man
has made his way up from physical conditions to the consciousness of spiritual
needs. Heredity and environment fetter him. He needs spiritual help. God provides
a spiritual environment in regeneration. As science is the verification of the ideal in
nature, so religion is the verification of the spiritual in human life.</q> Last sermon of
Seth K. Mitchell on <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, I make all things new</hi></q>&mdash;<q>God first makes a new man,
then gives him a new heart, then a new commandment. He also gives a new body, a
new name, a new robe, a new song, and a new home.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Scripture Representations.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Regeneration is a change indispensable to the salvation of the sinner.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 3:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Ye must be born anew</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 6:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature</hi></q> (marg.&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>creation</hi></q>); <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 12:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the sanctification without which no man shall see the Lord</hi></q>&mdash;regeneration,
therefore, is yet more necessary to salvation; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>by nature children
of wrath, even as the rest</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 3:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>There is none that understandeth, There is none that seeketh after God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John
6:44, 65</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>No man can come to me, except the Father that sent me draw him ... no man can come unto me, except
it be given unto him of the Father</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jer. 13:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then
may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It is a change in the inmost principle of life.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 3:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Except one be born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as the Father raiseth the dead
and giveth them life, even so the Son also giveth life to whom he will</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>present yourselves unto God,
as alive from the dead</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And you did he make alive, when ye were dead through your trespasses and
sins</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall shine upon thee.</hi></q> In <hi rend='italic'>John 3:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>born
anew</hi></q> = not, <q>altered,</q> <q>influenced,</q> <q>reinvigorated,</q> <q>reformed</q>; but a new
beginning, a new stamp or character, a new family likeness to God and to his children.
<q><hi rend='italic'>So is every one that is born of the Spirit</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 3:8</hi>) = 1. secrecy of process; 2. independence of
the will of man; 3. evidence given in results of conduct and life. It is a good thing to
remove the means of gratifying an evil appetite; but how much better it is to remove
the appetite itself! It is a good thing to save men from frequenting dangerous resorts
by furnishing safe places of recreation and entertainment; but far better is it to
implant within the man such a love for all that is pure and good, that he will instinctively
shun the impure and evil. Christianity aims to purify the springs of action.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It is a change in the heart, or governing disposition.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 12:33, 35</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Either make the tree good, and its fruit good; or make the tree corrupt, and its fruit corrupt: for
the tree is known by its fruit.... The good man out of his good treasure bringeth forth good things: and the evil
man out of his evil treasure bringeth forth evil things</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>15:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For out of the heart come forth evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, railings</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 16:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And a certain woman named Lydia ...
heard us: whose heart the Lord opened to give heed unto the things which were spoken by Paul</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But
thanks be to God, that, whereas ye were servants of sin, ye became obedient from the heart to that form of teaching whereunto
ye were delivered</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>10:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>with the heart man believeth unto righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 51:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Create in me
a clean heart, O God; And renew a right spirit within me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jer. 31:33</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I will put my law in their inward parts, and
in their hearts will I write it</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ez. 11:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you;
and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Horace Mann: <q>One former is worth a hundred reformers.</q> It is often said that the
redemption of society is as important as the regeneration of the individual. Yes, we
reply; but the regeneration of society can never be accomplished except through the
regeneration of the individual. Reformers try in vain to construct a stable and happy
community from persons who are selfish, weak, and miserable. The first cry of such
reformers is: <q>Get your circumstances changed!</q> Christ's first call is: <q>Get yourselves
changed, and then the things around you will be changed.</q> Many college settlements,
and temperance societies, and self-reformations begin at the wrong end. They
are like kindling a coal-fire by lighting kindlings at the top. The fire soon goes out.
We need God's work at the very basis of character and not on the outer edge, at the
very beginning, and not simply at the end. <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 6:33</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>seek ye first his kingdom, and his righteousness;
and all these things shall be added unto you.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) It is a change in the moral relations of the soul.
</p>

<pb n='811'/><anchor id='Pg811'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when we were dead through our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>4:23, 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that
ye be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, that after God hath been created in righteousness and
holiness of truth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 1:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who delivered us out of the power of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of
the Son of his love.</hi></q> William James, Varieties of Religious Experience, 508, finds the features
belonging to all religions: 1. an uneasiness; and 2. its solution. 1. The uneasiness,
reduced to its simplest terms, is a sense that there is <emph>something wrong about us</emph>, as we
naturally stand. 2. The solution is a sense that we are saved <emph>from the wrongness</emph> by
making proper connection with the higher powers.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(e) It is a change wrought in connection with the use of truth as a
means.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>James 1:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Of his own will he brought us forth by the word of truth</hi></q>&mdash;here in connection with the
special agency of God (not of mere natural law) the truth is spoken of as a means;
<hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>having been begotten again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, through the word of God, which
liveth and abideth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 1:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>his precious and exceeding great promises; that through these ye may become
partakers of the divine nature</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Jer. 23:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Is not my word like fire? saith Jehovah; and like a hammer that
breaketh the rock in pieces?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>John 15:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Already ye are clean because of the word which I have spoken unto
you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 6:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 4:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the word of God is living,
and active, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, of both joints and
marrow, and quick to discern the thoughts and intents of the heart</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 2:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>called you out of darkness into his
marvellous light.</hi></q> An advertising sign reads: <q>For spaces and ideas, apply to Johnson and
Smith.</q> In regeneration, we need both the open mind and the truth to instruct it, and
we may apply to God for both.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) It is a change instantaneous, secretly wrought, and known only in
its results.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 5:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that heareth my word, and believeth him that sent me, hath eternal life, and cometh not into judgment,
but hath passed out of death into life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 6:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>No man can serve two masters: for either he will
hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the other.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>John 3:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The wind bloweth
where it will, and thou hearest the voice thereof, but knowest not whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is
every one that is born of the Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; for
it is God who worketh in you both to will and to work, for his good pleasure</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 1:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Wherefore, brethren,
give the more diligence to make your calling and election sure.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) It is a change wrought by God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 1:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Except
one be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:8</hi>, marg.&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The Spirit
breatheth where it will</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:19, 20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, according to
that working of the strength of his might which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and made him
to sit at his right hand in the heavenly places</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good
works, which God afore prepared that we should walk in them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy begat us again unto a living hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 3:6, 7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. So then neither is he that
planteth anything, neither he that watereth; but God that giveth the increase.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
We have seen that we are <q><hi rend='italic'>begotten again ... through the word</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:23</hi>). In the revealed
truth with regard to the person and work of Christ there is a divine adaptation to the
work of renewing our hearts. But truth in itself is powerless to regenerate and
sanctify, unless the Holy Spirit uses it&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph.
6:17</hi>). Hence regeneration is ascribed preëminently to the Holy Spirit, and men are said
to be <q><hi rend='italic'>born of the Spirit</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 3:8</hi>). When Robert Morrison started for China, an incredulous
American said to him: <q>Mr. Morrison, do you think you can make any impression
on the Chinese?</q> <q>No,</q> was the reply; <q>but I think the Lord can.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>h</hi>) It is a change accomplished through the union of the soul with
Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus made me free from the law of sin and death</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor.
5:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if any man is in Christ, he is a new creature</hi></q> (marg.&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>there is a new creation</hi></q>); <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 1:15, 16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>it was
the good pleasure of God ... to reveal his Son in me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For we are his workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus for good works.</hi></q> On the Scriptural representations, see E. D. Griffin, Divine Efficiency,
117-164; H. B. Smith, System of Theology, 553-569&mdash;<q>Regeneration involves union with
Christ, and not a change of heart without relation to him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 3:14, 15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Father, from whom every fatherhood in heaven and on earth is named.</hi></q> But even here
God works through Christ, and Christ himself is called <q><hi rend='italic'>Everlasting Father</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Is. 9:6</hi>). The real
<pb n='812'/><anchor id='Pg812'/>
basis of our sonship and unity is in Christ, our Creator, and Upholder. Sin is repudiation
of this filial relationship. Regeneration by the Spirit restores our sonship by
joining us once more, ethically and spiritually, to Christ the Son, and so adopting us
again into God's family. Hence the Holy Spirit does not reveal himself, but Christ.
The Spirit is light, and light does not reveal itself, but all other things. I may know
that the Holy Spirit is working within me whenever I more clearly perceive Christ.
Sonship in Christ makes us not only individually children of God, but also members of
a commonwealth. <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 87:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Yea, of Zion it shall be said, This one and that one was born in her</hi></q> = <q>the
most glorious thing to be said about them is not something pertaining to their
separate history, but that they have become members, by adoption, of the city of
God</q> (Perowne). The Psalm speaks of the adoption of nations, but it is equally true
of individuals.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Necessity of Regeneration.</head>

<p>
That all men without exception need to be changed in moral character, is
manifest, not only from Scripture passages already cited, but from the following
rational considerations:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Holiness, or conformity to the fundamental moral attribute of God,
is the indispensable condition of securing the divine favor, of attaining
peace of conscience, and of preparing the soul for the associations and
employments of the blest.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Phillips Brooks seems to have taught that regeneration is merely a natural forward
step in man's development. See his Life, 2:353&mdash;<q>The entrance into this deeper consciousness
of sonship to God and into the motive power which it exercises is Regeneration,
the new birth, not merely with reference to time, but with reference also to
profoundness. Because man has something sinful to cast away in order to enter this
higher life, therefore regeneration must begin with repentance. But that is an incident.
It is not essential to the idea. A man simply imperfect and not sinful would still have
to be born again. The presentation of sin as guilt, of release as forgiveness, of consequence
as punishment, have their true meaning as the most personal expressions of
man's moral condition as always measured by, and man's moral changes as always
dependent upon, God.</q> Here imperfection seems to mean depraved condition as distinguished
from conscious transgression; it is not regarded as sinful; it needs not to be
repented of. Yet it does require regeneration. In Phillips Brooks's creed there is no
article devoted to sin. Baptism he calls <q>the declaration of the universal fact of the
sonship of man to God. The Lord's Supper is the declaration of the universal fact of
man's dependence upon God for supply of life. It is associated with the death of Jesus,
because in that the truth of God giving himself to man found its completest manifestation.</q>
</p>

<p>
Others seem to teach regeneration by education. Here too there is no recognition of
inborn sin or guilt. Man's imperfection of nature is innocent. He needs training in
order to fit him for association with higher intelligences and with God. In the evolution
of his powers there comes a natural crisis, like that of graduation of the scholar,
and this crisis may be called conversion. This educational theory of regeneration is
represented by Starbuck, Psychology of Religion, and by Coe, The Spiritual Life. What
human nature needs however is not evolution, but involution and revolution&mdash;involution,
the communication of a new life, and revolution, change of direction resulting
from that life. Human nature, as we have seen in our treatment of sin, is not a green
apple to be perfected by mere growth, but an apple with a worm at the core, which left
to itself will surely rot and perish.
</p>

<p>
President G. Stanley Hall, in his essay on The Religious Affirmations of Psychology,
says that the total depravity of man is an ascertained fact apart from the teachings of
the Bible. There had come into his hands for inspection several thousands of letters
written to a medical man who advertised that he would give confidential advice and
treatment to all, secretly. On the strength of these letters Dr. Hall was prepared to
say that John Calvin had not told the half of what is true. He declared that the necessity
of regeneration in order to the development of character was clearly established
from psychological investigation.
</p>

<p>
A. H. Strong, Cleveland Sermon, 1904&mdash;<q>Here is the danger of some modern theories
of Christian education. They give us statistics, to show that the age of puberty is the
<pb n='813'/><anchor id='Pg813'/>
age of strongest religious impressions; and the inference is drawn that conversion is
nothing but a natural phenomenon, a regular stage of development. The free will, and
the evil bent of that will, are forgotten, and the absolute dependence of perverse human
nature upon the regenerating spirit of God. The age of puberty is the age of the
strongest religious impressions? Yes, but it is also the age of the strongest artistic and
social and sensuous impressions, and only a new birth from above can lead the soul to
seek first the kingdom of God.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The condition of universal humanity as by nature depraved, and,
when arrived at moral consciousness, as guilty of actual transgression, is
precisely the opposite of that holiness without which the soul cannot exist
in normal relation to God, to self, or to holy beings.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Plutarch has a parable of a man who tried to make a dead body stand upright, but
who finished his labors saying: <q>Deest aliquid intus</q>&mdash;<q>There's something lacking
inside.</q> Ribot, Diseases of the Will, 53&mdash;<q>In the vicious man the moral elements are
lacking. If the idea of amendment arises, it is involuntary.... But if a first element
is not given by nature, and with it a potential energy, nothing results. The theological
dogma of grace as a free gift appears to us therefore founded upon a much more
exact psychology than the contrary opinion.</q> <q>Thou art chained to the wheel of the
foe By links which a world cannot sever: With thy tyrant through storm and through
calm thou shall go, And thy sentence is bondage forever.</q>
</p>

<p>
Martensen, Christian Ethics: <q>When Kant treats of the radical evil of human nature,
he makes the remarkable statement that, if a good will is to appear in us, this cannot
happen through a partial improvement, nor through any reform, but only through a
revolution, a total overturn within us, that is to be compared to a new creation.</q>
Those who hold that man may attain perfection by mere natural growth deny this
radical evil of human nature, and assume that our nature is a good seed which needs
only favorable external influences of moisture and sunshine to bring forth good fruit.
But human nature is a damaged seed, and what comes of it will be aborted and stunted
like itself. The doctrine of mere development denies God's holiness, man's sin, the
need of Christ, the necessity of atonement, the work of the Holy Spirit, the justice of
penalty. Kant's doctrine of the radical evil of human nature, like Aristotle's doctrine
that man is born on an inclined plane and subject to a downward gravitation, is not
matched by a corresponding doctrine of regeneration. Only the apostle Paul can tell
us how we came to be in this dreadful predicament, and where is the power that can
deliver us; see Stearns, Evidence of Christian Experience, 274.
</p>

<p>
Dean Swift's worthy sought many years for a method of extracting sunbeams from
cucumbers. We cannot cure the barren tree by giving it new bark or new branches,&mdash;it
must have new sap. Healing snakebites is not killing the snake. Poetry and
music, the uplifting power of culture, the inherent nobility of man, the general mercy
of God&mdash;no one of these will save the soul. Horace Bushnell: <q>The soul of all improvement
is the improvement of the soul.</q> Frost cannot be removed from a window pane
simply by scratching it away,&mdash;you must raise the temperature of the room. It is as
impossible to get regeneration out of reformation as to get a harvest out of a field by
mere plowing. Reformation is plucking bitter apples from a tree, and in their place
tying good apples on with a string (Dr. Pentecost). It is regeneration or degradation&mdash;the
beginning of an upward movement by a power not man's own, or the continuance
and increase of a downward movement that can end only in ruin.
</p>

<p>
Kidd, Social Evolution, shows that in humanity itself there resides no power of progress.
The ocean steamship that has burned its last pound of coal may proceed on its
course by virtue of its momentum, but it is only a question of the clock how soon it
will cease to move, except as tossed about by the wind and the waves. Not only is
there power lacking for the good, but apart from God's grace the evil tendencies constantly
became more aggravated. The settled states of the affections and will practically
dominate the life. Charles H. Spurgeon: <q>If a thief should get into heaven
unchanged, he would begin by picking the angels' pockets.</q> The land is full of examples
of the descent of man, not <emph>from</emph> the brute, but <emph>to</emph> the brute. The tares are not
degenerate wheat, which by cultivation will become good wheat,&mdash;they are not only
useless but noxious, and they must be rooted out and burned. <q>Society never will be
better than the individuals who compose it. A sound ship can never be made of rotten
timber. Individual reformation must precede social reconstruction.</q> Socialism will
<pb n='814'/><anchor id='Pg814'/>
always be a failure until it becomes Christian. We must be born from above, as truly
as we have been begotten by our fathers upon earth, or we cannot see the kingdom of
God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) A radical internal change is therefore requisite in every human soul&mdash;a
change in that which constitutes its character. Holiness cannot be
attained, as the pantheist claims, by a merely natural growth or development,
since man's natural tendencies are wholly in the direction of selfishness.
There must be a reversal of his inmost dispositions and principles
of action, if he is to see the kingdom of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Men's good deeds and reformation may be illustrated by eddies in a stream whose
general current is downward; by walking westward in a railway-car while the train is
going east; by Capt. Parry's traveling north, while the ice-floe on which he walked
was moving southward at a rate much more rapid than his walking. It is possible to
be <q><hi rend='italic'>ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 3:7</hi>). Better never have
been born, than not be born again. But the necessity of regeneration implies its possibility:
<hi rend='italic'>John 3:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Ye must be born anew</hi></q> = ye may be born anew,&mdash;the text is not merely
a warning and a command,&mdash;it is also a promise. Every sinner has the chance of
making a new start and of beginning a new life.
</p>

<p>
J. D. Robertson, The Holy Spirit and Christian Service, 57&mdash;<q>Emerson says that the
gate of gifts closes at birth. After a man emerges from his mother's womb he can
have no new endowments, no fresh increments of strength and wisdom, joy and grace
within. The only grace is the grace of creation. But this view is deistic and not
Christian.</q> Emerson's saying is true of natural gifts, but not of spiritual gifts. He
forgot Pentecost. He forgot the all-encompassing atmosphere of the divine personality
and love, and its readiness to enter in at every chink and crevice of our voluntary
being. The longing men have to turn over a new leaf in life's book, to break with the
past, to assert their better selves, is a preliminary impulse of God's Spirit and an evidence
of prevenient grace preparing the way for regeneration. Thus interpreted and
yielded to, these impulses warrant unbounded hope for the future. <q>No star is ever
lost we once have seen; We always may be what we might have been; The hopes that
lost in some far distance seem May be the truer life, and this the dream.</q>
</p>

<p>
The greatest minds feel, at least at times, their need of help from above. Although
Cicero uses the term <q>regeneration</q> to signify what we should call naturalization, yet
he recognizes man's dependence upon God: <q>Nemo vir magnus, sine aliquo divino
afflatu, unquam fuit.</q> Seneca: <q>Bonus vir sine illo nemo est.</q> Aristotle: <q>Wickedness
perverts the judgment and makes men err with respect to practical principles, so
that no man can be wise and judicious who is not good.</q> Goethe: <q>Who ne'er his
bread in sorrow ate, Who ne'er the mournful midnight hours Weeping upon his bed
has sate, He knows you not, ye heavenly Powers.</q> Shakespeare, King Lear: <q>Is there
a reason in nature for these hard hearts?</q> Robert Browning, in Halbert and Hob,
replies: <q>O Lear, That a reason out of nature must turn them soft, seems clear.</q>
</p>

<p>
John Stuart Mill (see Autobiography, 132-142) knew that the feeling of interest in
others' welfare would make him happy,&mdash;but the knowledge of this fact did not give
him the feeling. The <q>enthusiasm of humanity</q>&mdash;unselfish love, of which we read
in <q>Ecce Homo</q>&mdash;is easy to talk about; but how to produce it,&mdash;that is the question.
Drummond, Natural Law in the Spiritual World, 61-94&mdash;<q>There is no abiogenesis in the
spiritual, more than in the natural, world. Can the stone grow more and more living
until it enters the organic world? No, Christianity is a new life,&mdash;it is Christ in you.</q>
As natural life comes to us mediately, through Adam, so spiritual life comes to us
mediately, through Christ. See Bushnell, Nature and the Supernatural, 220-249; Anderson,
Regeneration, 51-88; Bennet Tyler, Memoir and Lectures, 340-354.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. The Efficient Cause of Regeneration.</head>

<p>
Three views only need be considered,&mdash;all others are modifications of
these. The first view puts the efficient cause of regeneration in the human
will; the second, in the truth considered as a system of motives; the third,
in the immediate agency of the Holy Spirit.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
John Stuart Mill regarded cause as embracing all the antecedents to an event.
Hazard, Man a Creative First Cause, 12-15, shows that, as at any given instant the
<pb n='815'/><anchor id='Pg815'/>
whole past is everywhere the same, the effects must, upon this view, at each instant be
everywhere one and the same. <q>The theory that, of every successive event, the real
cause is the whole of the antecedents, does not distinguish between the passive conditions
acted upon and changed, and the active agencies which act upon and change
them; does not distinguish what <emph>produces</emph>, from what merely <emph>precedes</emph>, change.</q>
</p>

<p>
We prefer the definition given by Porter, Human Intellect, 592&mdash;Cause is <q>the most
conspicuous and prominent of the agencies, or conditions, that produce a result</q>; or
that of Dr. Mark Hopkins: <q>Any exertion or manifestation of energy that produces
a change is a cause, and nothing else is. We must distinguish cause from occasion, or
material. Cause is not to be defined as <q>everything without which the effect could not
be realized.</q></q> Better still, perhaps, may we say, that efficient cause is the competent
producing power by which the effect is secured. James Martineau, Types, 1: preface,
xiii&mdash;<q>A cause is that which determines the indeterminate.</q> Not the light, but the
photographer, is the cause of the picture; light is but the photographer's servant. So
the <q><hi rend='italic'>word of God</hi></q> is the <q><hi rend='italic'>sword of the Spirit</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 6:17</hi>); the Spirit uses the word as his instrument;
but the Spirit himself is the cause of regeneration.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
A. The human will, as the efficient cause of regeneration.
</p>

<p>
This view takes two forms, according as the will is regarded as acting
apart from, or in conjunction with, special influences of the truth applied
by God. Pelagians hold the former; Arminians the latter.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) To the Pelagian view, that regeneration is solely the act of man, and
is identical with self-reformation, we object that the sinner's depravity,
since it consists in a fixed state of the affections which determines the
settled character of the volitions, amounts to a moral inability. Without
a renewal of the affections from which all moral action springs, man will
not choose holiness nor accept salvation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Man's volitions are practically the shadow of his affections. It is as useless to think of
a man's volitions separating themselves from his affections, and drawing him towards
God, as it is to think of a man's shadow separating itself from him, and leading him
in the opposite direction to that in which he is going. Man's affections, to use Calvin's
words, are like horses that have thrown off the charioteer and are running wildly,&mdash;they
need a new hand to direct them. In disease, we must be helped by a physician.
We do not stop a locomotive engine by applying force to the wheels, but by reversing
the lever. So the change in man must be, not in the transient volitions, but in the
deeper springs of action&mdash;the fundamental bent of the affections and will. See Henslow,
Evolution, 134. Shakespeare, All's Well that Ends Well, 2:1:149&mdash;<q>It is not so
with Him that all things knows, As 'tis with us that square our guess with shows;
But most it is presumption in us when The help of heaven we count the act of men.</q>
</p>

<p>
Henry Clay said that he did not know for himself personally what the change of
heart spoken of by Christians meant; but he had seen Kentucky family feuds of long
standing healed by religious revivals, and that whatever could heal a Kentucky family
feud was more than human.&mdash;Mr. Peter Harvey was a lifelong friend of Daniel Webster.
He wrote a most interesting volume of reminiscenses of the great man. He tells
how one John Colby married the oldest sister of Mr. Webster. Said Mr. Webster of
John Colby: <q>Finally he went up to Andover, New Hampshire, and bought a farm,
and the only recollection I have about him is that he was called the wickedest man in
the neighborhood, so far as swearing and impiety went. I used to wonder how my
sister could marry so profane a man as John Colby.</q> Years afterwards news comes to
Mr. Webster that a wonderful change has passed upon John Colby. Mr. Harvey and
Mr. Webster take a journey together to visit John Colby. As Mr. Webster enters John
Colby's house, he sees open before him a large-print Bible, which he has just been reading.
When greetings have been interchanged, the first question John Colby asks of
Mr. Webster is, <q>Are you a Christian?</q> And then, at John Colby's suggestion, the
two men kneel and pray together. When the visit is done, this is what Mr. Webster
says to Mr. Harvey as they ride away: <q>I should like to know what the enemies of
religion would say to John Colby's conversion. There was a man as unlikely, humanly
speaking, to become a Christian as any man I ever saw. He was reckless, heedless,
impious, never attended church, never experienced the good influence of associating
with religious people. And here he has been living on in that reckless way until he
<pb n='816'/><anchor id='Pg816'/>
has got to be an old man, until a period of life when you naturally would not expect
his habits to change. And yet he has been brought into the condition in which we
have seen him to-day,&mdash;a penitent, trusting, humble believer.</q> <q>Whatever people
may say,</q> added Mr. Webster, <q>nothing can convince me that anything short of the
grace of Almighty God could make such a change as I, with my own eyes, have witnessed
in the life of John Colby.</q> When they got back to Franklin, New Hampshire,
in the evening, they met another lifelong friend of Mr. Webster's, John Taylor, standing
at his door. Mr. Webster called out: <q>Well, John Taylor, miracles happen in these
latter days as well as in the days of old.</q> <q>What now, Squire?</q> asked John Taylor.
<q>Why,</q> replied Mr. Webster, <q>John Colby has become a Christian. If that is not a
miracle, what is?</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) To the Arminian view, that regeneration is the act of man, coöperating
with divine influences applied through the truth (synergistic theory),
we object that no beginning of holiness is in this way conceivable.
For, so long as man's selfish and perverse affections are unchanged, no
choosing God is possible but such as proceeds from supreme desire for
one's own interest and happiness. But the man thus supremely bent on
self-gratification cannot see in God, or his service, anything productive of
happiness; or, if he could see in them anything of advantage, his choice
of God and his service from such a motive would not be a holy choice, and
therefore could not be a beginning of holiness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Although Melanchthon (1497-1560) preceded Arminius (1560-1609), his view was substantially
the same with that of the Dutch theologian. Melanchthon never experienced
the throes and travails of a new spiritual life, as Luther did. His external and internal
development was peculiarly placid and serene. This Præceptor Germaniæ had the
modesty of the genuine scholar. He was not a dogmatist, and he never entered the
ranks of the ministry. He never could be persuaded to accept the degree of Doctor of
Theology, though he lectured on theological subjects to audiences of thousands. Dorner
says of Melanchthon: <q>He held at first that the Spirit of God is the primary, and the
word of God the secondary, or instrumental, agency in conversion, while the human
will allows their action and freely yields to it.</q> Later, he held that <q>conversion is the
result of the combined action (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>copulatio</foreign>) of three causes, the truth of God, the Holy
Spirit, and the will of man.</q> This synergistic view in his last years involved the theologian
of the German Reformation in serious trouble. Luthardt: <q>He made a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>facultas</foreign>
out of a mere <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>capacitas</foreign>.</q> Dorner says again: <q>Man's causality is not to be coördinated
with that of God, however small the influence ascribed to it. It is a purely
<emph>receptive</emph>, not a productive, agency. The opposite is the fundamental Romanist error.</q>
Self-love will never induce a man to give up self-love. Selfishness will not throttle
and cast out selfishness. <q>Such a choice from a selfish motive would be unholy,
when judged by God's standard. It is absurd to make salvation depend upon the exercises
of a wholly unspiritual power</q>; see Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:716-720 (Syst.
Doct., 4:179-183). Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:505&mdash;<q>Sin does not first stop, and then
holiness come in place of sin; but holiness positively expels sin. Darkness does not
first cease, and then light enter; but light drives out darkness.</q> On the Arminian
view, see Bib. Sac., 19:265, 266.
</p>

<p>
John Wesley's theology was a modified Arminianism, yet it was John Wesley who
did most to establish the doctrine of regeneration. He asserted that the Holy Spirit
acts through the truth, in distinction from the doctrine that the Holy Spirit works
solely through the ministers and sacraments of the church. But in asserting the work
of the Holy Spirit in the individual soul, he went too far to the opposite extreme of
emphasizing the ability of man to choose God's service, when without love to God
there was nothing in God's service to attract. A. H. Bradford, Age of Faith: <q>It is
as if Jesus had said: If a sailor will properly set his rudder the wind will fill his sails.
The will is the rudder of the character; if it is turned in the right direction, all the
winds of heaven will favor; if it is turned in the wrong direction, they will oppose.</q>
The question returns: What shall move the man to set his rudder aright, if he has no
desire to reach the proper haven? Here is the need of divine power, not merely to
coöperate with man, after man's will is set in the right direction, but to set it in the
right direction in the first place. <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>it is God who worketh in you both to will and to work,
for his good pleasure.</hi></q>
</p>

<pb n='817'/><anchor id='Pg817'/>

<p>
Still another modification of Arminian doctrine is found in the Revealed Theology
of N. W. Taylor of New Haven, who maintained that, antecedently to regeneration,
the <emph>selfish</emph> principle is suspended in the sinner's heart, and that then, prompted by <emph>self-love</emph>,
he uses the means of regeneration from motives that are neither sinful nor holy.
He held that all men, saints and sinners, have their own happiness for their ultimate
end. Regeneration involves no change in this principle or motive, but only a change
in the governing purpose to seek this happiness in God rather than in the world. Dr.
Taylor said that man could turn to God, whatever the Spirit did or did not do. He
could turn to God if he would; but he could also turn to God if he wouldn't. In other
words, he maintained the power of contrary choice, while yet affirming the certainty
that, without the Holy Spirit's influences, man would always choose wrongly. These
doctrines caused a division in the Congregational body. Those who opposed Taylor
withdrew their support from New Haven, and founded the East Windsor Seminary in
1834. For Taylor's view, see N. W. Taylor, Revealed Theology, 369-406, and in The
Christian Spectator for 1829.
</p>

<p>
The chief opponent of Dr. Taylor was Dr. Bennet Tyler. He replied to Dr. Taylor
that moral character has its seat, not in the purpose, but in the affections back of the
purpose. Otherwise every Christian must be in a state of sinless perfection, for his
governing purpose is to serve God. But we know that there are affections and desires
not under control of this purpose&mdash;dispositions not in conformity with the predominant
disposition. How, Dr. Tyler asked, can a sinner, completely selfish, from a selfish
motive, resolve not to be selfish, and so suspend his selfishness? <q>Antecedently to
regeneration, there can be no suspension of the selfish principle. It is said that, in
suspending it, the sinner is actuated by self-love. But is it possible that the sinner,
while destitute of love to God and every particle of genuine benevolence, should love
himself at all and not love himself supremely? He loves nothing more than self. He
does not regard God or the universe, except as they tend to promote his ultimate end,
his own happiness. No sinner ever suspended this selfishness until subdued by divine
grace. We can not become regenerate by preferring God to the world merely from
regard to our own interest. There is no necessity of the Holy Spirit to renew the
heart, if self-love prompts men to turn from the world to God. On the view thus combated,
depravity consists simply in ignorance. All men need is enlightenment as to
the best means of securing their own happiness. Regeneration by the Holy Spirit is,
therefore, not necessary.</q> See Bennet Tyler, Memoir and Lectures, 316-381, esp. 334,
370, 371; Letters on the New Haven Theology, 21-72, 143-163; review of Taylor and
Fitch, by E. D. Griffin, Divine Efficiency, 13-54; Martineau, Study, 2:9&mdash;<q>By making
it a man's interest to be disinterested, do you cause him to forget himself and put any
love into his heart? or do you only break him in and cause him to turn this way and
that by the bit and lash of a driving necessity?</q> The sinner, apart from the grace of
God, cannot see the truth. Wilberforce took Pitt to hear Cecil preach, but Pitt
declared that he did not understand a word that Cecil said. Apart from the grace of
God, the sinner, even when made to see the truth, resists it the more, the more clearly
he sees it. Then the Holy Spirit overcomes his opposition and makes him willing in
the day of God's power (<hi rend='italic'>Psalm 110:3</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The truth, as the efficient cause of regeneration.
</p>

<p>
According to this view, the truth as a system of motives is the direct and
immediate cause of the change from unholiness to holiness. This view is
objectionable for two reasons:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It erroneously regards motives as wholly external to the mind that
is influenced by them. This is to conceive of them as mechanically constraining
the will, and is indistinguishable from necessitarianism. On the
contrary, motives are compounded of external presentations and internal
dispositions. It is the soul's affections which render certain suggestions
attractive and others repugnant to us. In brief, the heart makes the motive.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Only as truth is loved, therefore, can it be a motive to holiness.
But we have seen that the aversion of the sinner to God is such that the
truth is hated instead of loved, and a thing that is hated, is hated more
<pb n='818'/><anchor id='Pg818'/>
intensely, the more distinctly it is seen. Hence no mere power of the
truth can be regarded as the efficient cause of regeneration. The contrary
view implies that it is not the truth which the sinner hates, but rather some
element of error which is mingled with it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Lyman Beecher and Charles G. Finney held this view. The influence of the Holy
Spirit differs from that of the preacher only in degree,&mdash;both use only moral suasion;
both do nothing more than to present the truth; both work upon the soul from without.
<q>Were I as eloquent as the Holy Ghost, I could convert sinners as well as he,</q> said a
popular preacher of this school (see Bennet Tyler, Letters on New Haven Theology,
164-171). On this view, it would be absurd to pray to God to regenerate, for that is
more than he can do,&mdash;regeneration is simply the effect of truth.
</p>

<p>
Miley, in Meth. Quar., July, 1881:434-462, holds that <q>the will cannot rationally act
without motive, but that it has always power to suspend action, or defer it, for the
purpose of rational examination of the motive or end, and to consider the opposite
motive or end. Putting the old end or motive out of view will temporarily break its
power, and the new truth considered will furnish motive for right action. Thus, by
using our faculty of suspending choice, and of fixing attention, we can realize the
permanent eligibility of the good and choose it against the evil. This is, however, not
the realization of a new spiritual life in regeneration, but the election of its attainment.
Power to do this suspending is of grace [grace, however, given equally to all].
Without this power, life would be a spontaneous and irresponsible development of evil.</q>
</p>

<p>
The view of Miley, thus substantially given, resembles that of Dr. Taylor, upon
which we have already commented; but, unlike that, it makes truth itself, apart from
the affections, a determining agency in the change from sin to holiness. Our one reply
is that, without a change in the affections, the truth can neither be known nor obeyed.
Seeing cannot be the means of being born again, for one must first be born again in
order to see the kingdom of God (<hi rend='italic'>John 3:3</hi>). The mind will not choose God, until God
appears to be the greatest good.
</p>

<p>
Edwards, quoted by Griffin, Divine Efficiency, 64&mdash;<q>Let the sinner apply his rational
powers to the contemplation of divine things, and let his belief be speculatively correct;
still he is in such a state that those objects of contemplation will excite in him no
holy affections.</q> The Scriptures declare (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:7</hi>) that <q><hi rend='italic'>the mind of the flesh is enmity</hi></q>&mdash;not
against some error or mistaken notion of God&mdash;but <q><hi rend='italic'>is enmity against God</hi>.</q> It is God's
holiness, mandatory and punitive, that is hated. A clearer view of that holiness will
only increase the hatred. A woman's hatred of spiders will never be changed to love by
bringing them close to her. Magnifying them with a compound oxy-hydrogen microscope
will not help the matter. Tyler: <q>All the light of the last day will not subdue
the sinner's heart.</q> The mere presence of God, and seeing God face to face, will be hell
to him, if his hatred be not first changed to love. See E. D. Griffin, Divine Efficiency,
105-116, 203-221; and review of Griffin, by S. R. Mason, Truth Unfolded, 383-407.
</p>

<p>
Bradford, Heredity and Christian Problems, 239&mdash;<q>Christianity puts three motives
before men: love, self-love, and fear.</q> True, but the last two are only preliminary
motives, not essentially Christian. The soul that is moved only by self-love or by fear
has not yet entered into the Christian life at all. And any attention to the truth of God
which originates in these motives has no absolute moral value, and cannot be regarded
as even a beginning of salvation. Nothing but holiness and love are entitled to be
called Christianity, and these the truth of itself cannot summon up. The Spirit of God
must go with the truth to impart right desires and to make the truth effective. E. G.
Robinson: <q>The glory of our salvation can no more be attributed to the word of God
only, than the glory of a Praxiteles or a Canova can be ascribed to the chisel or the
mallet with which he wrought into beauty his immortal creations.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. The immediate agency of the Holy Spirit, as the efficient cause of
regeneration.
</p>

<p>
In ascribing to the Holy Spirit the authorship of regeneration, we do
not affirm that the divine Spirit accomplishes his work without any accompanying
instrumentality. We simply assert that the power which regenerates
is the power of God, and that although conjoined with the use of
means, there is a direct operation of this power upon the sinner's heart
<pb n='819'/><anchor id='Pg819'/>
which changes its moral character. We add two remarks by way of further
explanation:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The Scriptural assertions of the indwelling of the Holy Spirit and
of his mighty power in the soul forbid us to regard the divine Spirit in
regeneration as coming in contact, not with the soul, but only with the
truth. The phrases, <q>to energize the truth,</q> <q>to intensify the truth,</q>
<q>to illuminate the truth,</q> have no proper meaning; since even God cannot
make the truth more true. If any change is wrought, it must be wrought,
not in the truth, but in the soul.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The maxim, <q>Truth is mighty and will prevail,</q> is very untrue, if God be left out of
the account. Truth without God is an abstraction, and not a power. It is a mere instrument,
useless without an agent. <q><hi rend='italic'>The sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 6:17</hi>), must
be wielded by the Holy Spirit himself. And the Holy Spirit comes in contact, not
simply with the instrument, but with the soul. To all moral, and especially to all religious
truth, there is an inward unsusceptibility, arising from the perversity of the affections
and the will. This blindness and hardness of heart must be removed, before the
soul can perceive or be moved by the truth. Hence the Spirit must deal directly with
the soul. Denovan: <q>Our natural hearts are hearts of stone. The word of God is
good seed sown on the hard, trodden, macadamized highway, which the horses of
passion, the asses of self-will, the wagons of imaginary treasure, have made impenetrable.
Only the Holy Spirit can soften and pulverize this soil.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Psalmist prays: <q><hi rend='italic'>Incline my heart unto thy testimonies</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 119:36</hi>), while of Lydia it is
said: <q><hi rend='italic'>whose heart the Lord opened to give heed unto the things which were spoken by Paul</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 16:14</hi>). We
may say of the Holy Spirit: <q>He freezes and then melts the soil, He breaks the hard,
cold stone, Kills out the rooted weeds so vile,&mdash;All this he does alone; And every virtue
we possess, And every victory won, And every thought of holiness, Are his, and his
alone.</q> Hence, in <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 90:16, 17</hi>, the Psalmist says, first: <q><hi rend='italic'>Let thy work appear unto thy servants</hi></q>;
then <q><hi rend='italic'>establish thou the work of our hands upon us</hi></q>&mdash;God's work is first to appear,&mdash;then man's
work, which is God's work carried out by human instruments. At Jericho, the force
was not applied to the rams' horns, but to the walls. When Jesus healed the blind man,
his power was applied, not to the spittle, but to the eyes. The impression is prepared,
not by heating the seal, but by softening the wax. So God's power acts, not upon the
truth, but upon the sinner.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 59:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>My God with his lovingkindness will meet me</hi></q>; A. V.&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The God of my mercy shall prevent me</hi>,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, go before me. Augustine urges this text as proof that the grace of God precedes all
merit of man: <q>What didst thou find in me but only sins? Before I do anything good,
his mercy will go before me. What will unhappy Pelagius answer here?</q> Calvin however
says this may be a pious, but it is not a fair, use of the passage. The passage does
teach dependence upon God; but God's anticipation of our action, or in other words,
the doctrine of prevenient grace, must be derived from other portions of Scripture, such
as <hi rend='italic'>John 1:13</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:10</hi>. <q>The enthusiasm of humanity</q> to which J. R. Seeley, the
author of Ecce Homo, exhorts us, is doubtless the secret of happiness and usefulness,&mdash;unfortunately
he does not tell us whence it may come. John Stuart Mill felt the
need of it, but he did not get it. Arthur Hugh Clough, Clergyman's First Tale:
<q>Would I could wish my wishes all to rest, And know to wish the wish that were the
best.</q> Bradford, Heredity, 228&mdash;<q>God is the environment of the soul, yet man has free
will. Light fills the spaces, yet a man from ignorance may remain in a cave, or from
choice may dwell in darkness.</q> Man needs therefore a divine influence which will
beget in him a disposition to use his opportunities aright.
</p>

<p>
We may illustrate the philosophy of revivals by the canal boat which lies before the
gate of a lock. No power on earth can open the lock. But soon the lock begins to fill,
and when the water has reached the proper level, the gate can be opened almost at a
touch. Or, a steamer runs into a sandbar. Tugs fail to pull the vessel off. Her own
engines cannot accomplish it. But when the tide comes in, she swings free without
effort. So what we need in religion is an influx of spiritual influence which will make
easy what before is difficult if not impossible. The Superintendent of a New York
State Prison tells us that the common schools furnish 83 per cent., and the colleges and
academies over 4 per cent., of the inmates of Auburn and Sing Sing. Truth without
the Holy Spirit to apply it is like sunshine without the actinic ray which alone can give
it vitalizing energy.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='820'/><anchor id='Pg820'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Even if truth could be energized, intensified, illuminated, there
would still be needed a change in the moral disposition, before the soul
could recognize its beauty or be affected by it. No mere increase of light
can enable a blind man to see; the disease of the eye must first be cured
before external objects are visible. So God's work in regeneration must
be performed within the soul itself. Over and above all influence of the
truth, there must be a direct influence of the Holy Spirit upon the heart.
Although wrought in conjunction with the presentation of truth to the
intellect, regeneration differs from moral suasion in being an immediate
act of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Before regeneration, man's knowledge of God is the blind man's knowledge of color.
The Scriptures call such knowledge <q><hi rend='italic'>ignorance</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:18</hi>). The heart does not appreciate
God's mercy. Regeneration gives an experimental or heart knowledge; see Shedd,
Dogm. Theol., 2:495. <hi rend='italic'>Is. 50:4</hi>&mdash;God <q><hi rend='italic'>wakeneth mine ear to hear</hi>.</q> It is false to say that soul
can come in contact with soul only through the influence of truth. In the intercourse
of dear friends, or in the discourse of the orator, there is a personal influence, distinct
from the word spoken, which persuades the heart and conquers the will. We sometimes
call it <q>magnetism,</q>&mdash;but we mean simply that soul reaches soul, in ways apart from
the use of physical intermediaries. Compare the facts, imperfectly known as yet, of
second sight, mind-reading, clairvoyance. But whether these be accepted or not, it
still is true that God has not made the human soul so that it is inaccessible to himself.
The omnipresent Spirit penetrates and pervades all spirits that have been made by
him. See Lotze, Outlines of Psychology (Ladd), 142, 143.
</p>

<p>
In the primary change of disposition, which is the most essential feature of regeneration,
the Spirit of God acts directly upon the spirit of man. In the securing of the
initial exercise of this new disposition&mdash;which constitutes the secondary feature of
God's work of regeneration&mdash;the truth is used as a means. Hence, perhaps, in <hi rend='italic'>James
1:18</hi>, we read: <q><hi rend='italic'>Of his own will he brought us forth by the word of truth</hi></q> instead of <q>he begat us by
the word of truth,</q>&mdash;the reference being to the secondary, not to the primary, feature
of regeneration. The advocates of the opposite view&mdash;the view that God works <emph>only</emph>
through the truth as a means, and that his <emph>only</emph> influence upon the soul is a moral
influence&mdash;very naturally deny the mystical union of the soul with Christ. Squier,
for example, in his Autobiog., 343-378, esp. 360, on the Spirit's influences, quotes <hi rend='italic'>John
16:8</hi>&mdash;he <q><hi rend='italic'>will convict the world in respect of sin</hi></q>&mdash;to show that God regenerates by applying
truth to men's minds, so far as to convince them, by fair and sufficient arguments,
that they are sinners.
</p>

<p>
Christ, opening blind eyes and unstopping deaf ears, illustrates the nature of God's
operation in regeneration,&mdash;in the case of the blind, there is plenty of <emph>light</emph>,&mdash;what
is wanted is <emph>sight</emph>. The negro convert said that his conversion was due to himself and
God: he fought against God with all his might, and God did the rest. So our moral
successes are due to ourselves and God,&mdash;we have done only the fighting against God,
and God has done the rest. The sand of Sahara would not bring forth flowers and
fruit, even if you turned into it a hundred rivers like the Nile. Man may hear sermons
for a lifetime, and still be barren of all spiritual growths. The soil of the heart needs
to be changed, and the good seed of the kingdom needs to be planted there.
</p>

<p>
For the view that truth is <q>energized</q> or <q>intensified</q> by the Holy Spirit, see
Phelps, New Birth, 61, 121; Walker, Philosophy of Plan of Salvation, chap. 18. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>,
see Wardlaw, Syst. Theol., 3:24, 25; E. D. Griffin, Divine Efficiency, 73-116; Anderson,
Regeneration, 123-168; Edwards, Works, 2:547-597; Chalmers, Lectures on Romans,
chap. 1; Payne, Divine Sovereignty, lect. 23:363-367; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 3:3-37, 466-485.
On the whole subject of the Efficient Cause of Regeneration, see Hopkins, Works,
1:454; Dwight, Theology, 2:418-429; John Owen, Works, 3:282-297, 366-538; Robert
Hall, Sermon on the Cause, Agent, and Purpose of Regeneration.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. The Instrumentality used in Regeneration.</head>

<p>
A. The Roman, English and Lutheran churches hold that regeneration
is accomplished through the instrumentality of baptism. The Disciples,
or followers of Alexander Campbell, make regeneration include baptism,
<pb n='821'/><anchor id='Pg821'/>
as well as repentance and faith. To the view that baptism is a means of
regeneration we urge the following objections:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The Scriptures represent baptism to be not the means but only the
sign of regeneration, and therefore to presuppose and follow regeneration.
For this reason only believers&mdash;that is, persons giving credible evidence
of being regenerated&mdash;were baptized (Acts 8:12). Not external baptism,
but the conscientious turning of the soul to God which baptism symbolizes,
saves us (1 Pet. 3:21&mdash;συνειδήσεως ἀγαθῆς ἐπερώτημα). Texts like John
3:5, Acts 2:38, Col. 2:12, Tit. 3:5, are to be explained upon the principle
that regeneration, the inward change, and baptism, the outward sign
of that change, were regarded as only different sides or aspects of the same
fact, and either side or aspect might therefore be described in terms
derived from the other.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Upon this view, there is a striking incongruity between the nature
of the change to be wrought and the means employed to produce it. The
change is a spiritual one, but the means are physical. It is far more
rational to suppose that, in changing the character of intelligent beings,
God uses means which have relation to their intelligence. The view we
are considering is part and parcel of a general scheme of mechanical rather
than moral salvation, and is more consistent with a materialistic than with
a spiritual philosophy.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 8:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when they believed Philip preaching good tidings concerning the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus
Christ, they were baptized</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 3:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>which also after a true likeness doth now save you, even baptism, not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the interrogation</hi> [marg.&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>inquiry</hi></q>, <q><hi rend='italic'>appeal</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>of a good conscience toward
God</hi></q> = the inquiry of the soul after God, the conscientious turning of the soul to God.
</p>

<p>
Plumptre, however, makes ἐπερώτημα a forensic term equivalent to <q>examination,</q>
and including both question and answer. It means, then, the open answer of allegiance
to Christ, given by the new convert to the constituted officers of the church.
<q>That which is of the essence of the saving power of baptism is the confession and the
profession which precede it. If this comes from a conscience that really renounces sin
and believes on Christ, then baptism, as the channel through which the grace of the
new birth is conveyed and the convert admitted into the church of Christ, <q>saves us,</q>
but not otherwise.</q> We may adopt this statement from Plumptre's Commentary,
with the alteration of the word <q>conveyed</q> into <q>symbolized</q> or <q>manifested.</q>
Plumptre's interpretation is, as he seems to admit, in its obvious meaning inconsistent
with infant baptism; to us it seems equally inconsistent with any doctrine of baptismal
regeneration.
</p>

<p>
Scriptural regeneration is God's (1) changing man's disposition, and (2) securing its
first exercise. Regeneration, according to the Disciples, is man's (1) repentance and
faith, and (2) submission to baptism. Alexander Campbell, Christianity Restored:
<q>We plead that all the converting power of the Holy Spirit is exhibited in the divine
Record.</q> Address of Disciples to Ohio Baptist State Convention, 1871: <q>With us
regeneration includes all that is comprehended in faith, repentance, and baptism, and
so far as it is expressive of birth, it belongs more properly to the last of these than to
either of the former.</q> But if baptism be the instrument of regeneration, it is difficult
to see how the patriarchs, or the penitent thief, could have been regenerated. <hi rend='italic'>Luke
23:43</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.</hi></q> Bossuet: <q><hi rend='italic'>This day</hi></q>&mdash;what promptitude!
<q><hi rend='italic'>With me</hi></q>&mdash;what companionship! <q><hi rend='italic'>In Paradise</hi></q>&mdash;what rest! Bersier: <q><q><hi rend='italic'>This day</hi></q>&mdash;what
then? no flames of Purgatory? no long period of mournful expiation? <q><hi rend='italic'>This day</hi></q>&mdash;pardon
and heaven!</q>
</p>

<p>
Baptism is a condition of being outwardly in the kingdom; it is not a condition of
being inwardly in the kingdom. The confounding of these two led many in the early
church to dread dying unbaptized, rather than dying unsaved. Even Pascal, in later
times, held that participation in outward ceremonies might lead to real conversion.
He probably meant that an initial act of holy will would tend to draw others in its train.
Similarly we urge unconverted people to take some step that will manifest religious
<pb n='822'/><anchor id='Pg822'/>
interest. We hope that in taking this step a new decision of the will, inwrought by
the Spirit of God, may reveal itself. But a religion which consists only in such outward
performances is justly denominated a cutaneous religion, for it is only skin-deep.
On <hi rend='italic'>John 3:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Except one be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Repent
ye, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ unto the remission of your sins</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col.
2:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>buried with him in baptism, wherein ye were also raised with him through faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Tit. 3:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>saved us,
through the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit</hi></q>&mdash;see further discussion and exposition
in our chapter on the Ordinances. Adkins, Disciples and Baptists, a booklet
published by the Am. Bap. Pub. Society, is the best statement of the Baptist position,
as distinguished from that of the Disciples. It claims that Disciples overrate the
externals of Christianity and underrate the work of the Holy Spirit. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Per contra</foreign>, see
Gates, Disciples and Baptists.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The Scriptural view is that regeneration, so far as it secures an
activity of man, is accomplished through the instrumentality of the truth.
Although the Holy Spirit does not in any way illuminate the truth, he
does illuminate the mind, so that it can perceive the truth. In conjunction
with the change of man's inner disposition, there is an appeal to man's
rational nature through the truth. Two inferences may be drawn:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Man is not wholly passive at the time of his regeneration. He is
passive only with respect to the change of his ruling disposition. With
respect to the exercise of this disposition, he is active. Although the efficient
power which secures this exercise of the new disposition is the power
of God, yet man is not therefore unconscious, nor is he a mere machine
worked by God's fingers. On the other hand, his whole moral nature
under God's working is alive and active. We reject the <q>exercise-system,</q>
which regards God as the direct author of all man's thoughts, feelings,
and volitions, not only in its general tenor, but in its special application to
regeneration.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:503&mdash;<q>A dead man cannot assist in his own resurrection.</q>
This is true so far as the giving of life is concerned. But once made alive, man can,
like Lazarus, obey Christ's command and <q><hi rend='italic'>come forth</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 11:43</hi>). In fact, if he does not
obey, there is no evidence that there is spiritual life. <q>In us is God; we burn but as
he moves</q>&mdash;<q>Est deus in nobis; agitante calescimus illo.</q> Wireless telegraphy
requires an attuned receiver; regeneration attunes the soul so that it vibrates responsively
to God and receives the communications of his truth. When a convert came
to Rowland Hill and claimed that she had been converted in a dream, he replied: <q>We
will see how you walk, now that you are awake.</q>
</p>

<p>
Lord Bacon said he would open every one of Argus's hundred eyes, before he opened
one of Briareus's hundred hands. If God did not renew men's hearts in connection
with our preaching of the truth, we might well give up our ministry. E. G. Robinson:
<q>The conversion of a soul is just as much according to law as the raising of a crop of
turnips.</q> Simon, Reconciliation, 377&mdash;<q>Though the mere preaching of the gospel is
not the <emph>cause</emph> of the conversion and revivification of men, it is a necessary <emph>condition</emph>&mdash;as
necessary as the action of light and heat, or other physical agencies, are on a germ,
if it is to develop, grow, and bear its proper fruit.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The activity of man's mind in regeneration is activity in view of
the truth. God secures the initial exercise of the new disposition which
he has wrought in man's heart in connection with the use of truth as a
means. Here we perceive the link between the efficiency of God and the
activity of man. Only as the sinner's mind is brought into contact with
the truth, does God complete his regenerating work. And as the change
of inward disposition and the initial exercise of it are never, so far as we
know, separated by any interval of time, we can say, in general, that
Christian work is successful only as it commends the truth to every man's
conscience in the sight of God (2 Cor. 4:2).
</p>

<pb n='823'/><anchor id='Pg823'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:17, 18</hi>, there is recognized the divine illumination of the mind to behold the
truth&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>may give unto you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him; having the eyes of your
heart enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling</hi></q> On truth as a means of regeneration,
see Hovey, Outlines, 192, who quotes Cunningham, Historical Theology, 1:617&mdash;<q>Regeneration
may be taken in a limited sense as including only the first impartation
of spiritual life ... or it may be taken in a wider sense as comprehending the whole
of that process by which he is renewed or made over again in the whole man after the
image of God,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, as including the production of saving faith and union to Christ.
Only in the first sense did the Reformers maintain that man in the process was wholly
passive and not active; for they did not dispute that, before the process in the second
and more enlarged sense was completed, man was spiritually alive and active, and continued
so ever after during the whole process of his sanctification.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. Hovey suggests an apt illustration of these two parts of the Holy Spirit's work
and their union in regeneration: At the same time that God makes the photographic
plate sensitive, he pours in the light of truth whereby the image of Christ is formed in
the soul. Without the <q>sensitizing</q> of the plate, it would never fix the rays of light
so as to retain the image. In the process of <q>sensitizing,</q> the plate is passive; under
the influence of light, it is active. In both the <q>sensitizing</q> and the taking of the picture,
the real agent is not the plate nor the light, but the photographer. The photographer
cannot perform both operations at the same moment. God can. He gives the
new affection, and at the same instant he secures its exercise in view of the truth.
</p>

<p>
For denial of the instrumentality of truth in regeneration, see Pierce, in Bap. Quar.,
Jan. 1872:52. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Anderson, Regeneration, 89-122. H. B. Smith holds middle
ground. He says: <q>In adults it [regeneration] is wrought most frequently by the
word of God as the instrument. Believing that infants may be regenerated, we cannot
assert that it is tied to the word of God absolutely.</q> We prefer to say that, if infants
are regenerated, they also are regenerated in conjunction with some influence of truth
upon the mind, dim as the recognition of it may be. Otherwise we break the Scriptural
connection between regeneration and conversion, and open the way for faith in
a physical, magical, sacramental salvation. Squier, Autobiog., 368, says well, of the
theory of regeneration which makes man purely passive, that it has a benumbing
effect upon preaching: <q>The lack of expectation unnerves the efforts of the preacher;
an impression of the fortuitous presence neutralizes his engagedness. This antinomian
dependence on the Spirit extracts all vitality from the pulpit and sense of responsibility
from the hearer, and makes preaching an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opus operatum</foreign>, like the baptismal
regeneration of the formalist.</q> Only of the first element in regeneration are Shedd's
words true: <q>A dead man cannot assist in his own resurrection</q> (Dogm. Theol., 2:503).
</p>

<p>
Squier goes to the opposite extreme of regarding the truth alone as the cause of
regeneration. His words are none the less a valuable protest against the view that
regeneration is so entirely due to God that in no part of it is man active. It was with
a better view that Luther cried: <q>O that we might multiply living books, that is,
preachers!</q> And the preacher is successful only as he possesses and unfolds the
truth. John took the little book from the Covenant-angel's hand and ate it (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 10:8-11</hi>).
So he who is to preach God's truth must feed upon it, until it has become his own.
For the Exercise-system, see Emmons, Works, 4:339-411; Hagenbach, Hist. Doct., 2:439.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>5. The Nature of the Change wrought in Regeneration.</head>

<p>
A. It is a change in which the governing disposition is made holy.
This implies that:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It is not a change in the substance of either body or soul. Regeneration
is not a physical change. There is no physical seed or germ
implanted in man's nature. Regeneration does not add to, or subtract
from, the number of man's intellectual, emotional or voluntary faculties.
But regeneration is the giving of a new direction or tendency to powers
of affection which man possessed before. Man had the faculty of love
before, but his love was supremely set on self. In regeneration the direction
of that faculty is changed, and his love is now set supremely upon
God.
</p>

<pb n='824'/><anchor id='Pg824'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>created in Christ Jesus for good works</hi></q>&mdash;does not imply that the old soul is annihilated,
and a new soul created. The <q><hi rend='italic'>old man</hi></q> which is <q><hi rend='italic'>crucified</hi></q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:6</hi>) and <q><hi rend='italic'>put
away</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:22</hi>) is simply the sinful bent of the affections and will. When this direction
of the dispositions is changed, and becomes holy, we can call the change a new
birth of the old nature, because the same <emph>faculties</emph> that acted before are acting now,
the only difference being that now these faculties are set toward God and purity. Or,
regarding the change from another point of view, we may speak of man as having a
<q>new nature,</q> as <q>recreated,</q> as being a <q>new creature,</q> because this <emph>direction</emph> of
the affection and will, which ensures a different life from what was led before, is something
totally new, and due wholly to the regenerating act of God. In <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>begotten
again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible</hi></q>&mdash;all materialistic inferences from the word
<q><emph>seed</emph>,</q> as if it implied the implantation of a physical germ, are prevented by the following
explanatory words: <q><hi rend='italic'>through the word of God, which liveth and abideth</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
So, too, when we describe regeneration as the communication of a new life to the
soul, we should not conceive of this new life as a <emph>substance</emph> imparted or infused into us.
The new life is rather a new direction and activity of our own affections and will.
There is, indeed a union of the soul with Christ; Christ dwells in the renewed heart;
Christ's entrance into the soul is the <emph>cause</emph> and <emph>accompaniment</emph> of its regeneration.
But this entrance of Christ into the soul is not <emph>itself</emph> regeneration. We must distinguish
the effect from the cause; otherwise we shall be in danger of a pantheistic confounding
of our own personality and life with the personality and life of Christ. Christ
is indeed our life, in the sense of being the cause and supporter of our life, but he is
not our life in the sense that, after our union with him, our individuality ceases. The
effect of union with Christ is rather that our individuality is enlarged and exalted (<hi rend='italic'>John
10:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly.</hi></q> See page <ref target='Pg799'>799</ref>, (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>)).
</p>

<p>
We must therefore take with a grain of allowance the generally excellent words of
A. J. Gordon, Twofold Life, 22&mdash;<q>Regeneration is the communication of the divine
nature to man by the operation of the Holy Spirit through the word (<hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 1:4</hi>).... As
Christ was made partaker of human nature by incarnation, that so he might enter into
truest fellowship with us, we are made partakers of the divine nature, by regeneration,
that we may enter into truest fellowship with God. Regeneration is not a change of
nature, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, a natural heart bettered. Eternal life is not natural life prolonged into
endless duration. It is the divine life imparted to us, the very life of God communicated
to the human soul, and bringing forth there its proper fruit.</q> Dr. Gordon's
view that regeneration adds a new substance or faculty to the soul is the result of
literalizing the Scripture metaphors of creation and life. This turning of symbol into
fact accounts for his tendency toward annihilation doctrine in the case of the unregenerate,
toward faith cure and the belief that all physical evils can be removed by
prayer. E. H. Johnson, The Holy Spirit: <q>Regeneration is a change, not in the quantity,
but in the quality, of the soul.</q> E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 320&mdash;<q>Regeneration
consists in a divinely wrought change in the moral affections.</q>
</p>

<p>
So, too, we would criticize the doctrine of Drummond, Nat. Law in the Spir. World:
<q>People forget the persistence of force. Instead of transforming energy, they try to
create it. We must either depend on environment, or be self-sufficient. The <q>cannot <hi rend='italic'>bear
fruit of itself</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 15:4</hi>) is the <q><emph>cannot</emph></q> of natural law. Natural fruit flourishes with air and
sunshine. The difference between the Christian and the non-Christian is the difference
between the organic and the inorganic. The Christian has all the characteristics of
life: assimilation, waste, reproduction, spontaneous action.</q> See criticism of Drummond,
by Murphy, in Brit. Quar., 1884:118-125&mdash;<q>As in resurrection there is a physical
connection with the old body, so in regeneration there is a natural connection with the
old soul.</q> Also, Brit. Quar., July, 1880, art.: Evolution Viewed in Relation to Theology&mdash;<q>The
regenerating agency of the Spirit of God is symbolized, not by the vitalization
of dead matter, but by the agency of the organizing intelligence which guides
the evolution of living beings.</q> Murphy's answer to Drummond is republished.
Murphy's Natural Selection and Spiritual Freedom, 1-33&mdash;<q>The will can no more
create force, either muscular or mental, than it can create matter. And it is equally
true that for our spiritual nourishment and spiritual force we are altogether dependent
on our spiritual environment, which is God.</q> In <q>dead matter</q> there is no sin.
</p>

<p>
Drummond would imply that, as matter has no promise or potency of life and is
not responsible for being without life (or <q>dead,</q> to use his misleading word), and if
it ever is to live must wait for the life-giving influence to come unsought, so the
human soul is not responsible for being spiritually dead, cannot seek for life, must
passively wait for the Spirit. Plymouth Brethren generally hold the same view with
<pb n='825'/><anchor id='Pg825'/>
Drummond, that regeneration <emph>adds</emph> something&mdash;as <emph>vitality</emph>&mdash;to the substance of the
soul. Christ is transsubstantiated into the soul's substance; or, the πνεῦμα is added.
But we have given over talking of vitality, as if it were a substance or faculty. We
regard it as merely a mode of action. Evolution, moreover, uses what already exists,
so far as it will go, instead of creating new; as in the miracle of the loaves, and as in the
original creation of man, so in his recreation or regeneration. Dr. Charles Hodge also
makes the same mistake in calling regeneration an <q>origination of the principle of the
spirit of life, just as literal and real a creation as the origination of the principle
of natural life.</q> This, too, literalizes Scripture metaphor, and ignores the fact that
the change accomplished in regeneration is an exclusively moral one. There is indeed
a new entrance of Christ into the soul, or a new exercise of his spiritual power within
the soul. But the effect of Christ's working is not to add any new faculty or substance,
but only to give new direction to already existing powers.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Regeneration involves an enlightenment of the understanding and
a rectification of the volitions. But it seems most consonant with Scripture
and with a correct psychology to regard these changes as immediate and
necessary consequences of the change of disposition already mentioned,
rather than as the primary and central facts in regeneration. The taste for
truth logically precedes perception of the truth, and love for God logically
precedes obedience to God; indeed, without love no obedience is possible.
Reverse the lever of affection, and this moral locomotive, without further
change, will move away from sin, and toward truth and God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Texts which seem to imply that a right taste, disposition, affection, logically precedes
both knowledge of God and obedience to God, are the following: <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 34:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Oh taste and see
that Jehovah is good</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>119:36</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Incline my heart unto thy testimonies</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jer. 24:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I will give them a heart
to know me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 5:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 7:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If any man
willeth to do his will, he shall know of the teaching, whether it is of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 16:14</hi>&mdash;of Lydia it is said:
<q><hi rend='italic'>whose heart the Lord opened to give heed unto the things which were spoken by Paul</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>having the
eyes of your heart enlightened.</hi></q> <q>Change the centre of a circle and you change the place and
direction of all its radii.</q>
</p>

<p>
The text <hi rend='italic'>John 1:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But as many as received him, to them gave him the right to become children of God,
even to them that believe on his name: who were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God</hi></q>&mdash;seems at first sight to imply that faith is the condition of regeneration,
and therefore prior to it. <q>But if ἐξουσίαν here signifies the <q><emph>right</emph></q> or <q>privilege</q> of
sonship, it is a right which may presuppose faith as the work of the Spirit in regeneration&mdash;a
work apart from which no genuine faith exists in the soul. But it is possible
that John means to say that, in the case of all who received Christ, their power to
believe was <emph>given</emph> to them by him. In the original the emphasis is on <q><emph>gave,</emph></q> and this is
shown by the order of the words</q>; see Hovey, Manual of Theology, 345, and Com. on
<hi rend='italic'>John 1:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q>The meaning would then be this: <q>Many did not receive him; but some
did; and as to all who received him, he <emph>gave</emph> them grace by which they were enabled
to do this, and so to become God's children.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Ruskin: <q>The first and last and closest trial question to any living creature is,
<q>What do you like?</q> Go out into the street and ask the first man you meet what his
taste is, and, if he answers candidly, you know him, body and soul. What we like
determines what we are, and is the sign of what we are; and to teach taste is inevitably
to form character.</q> If the taste here spoken of is moral and spiritual taste, the words
of Ruskin are sober truth. Regeneration is essentially a changing of the fundamental
taste of the soul. But by taste we mean the direction of man's love, the bent of his
affections, the trend of his will. And to alter that taste is not to impart a new faculty,
or to create a new substance, but simply to set toward God the affections which
hitherto have been set upon self and sin. We may illustrate by the engineer who
climbs over the cab into a runaway locomotive and who changes its course, not by
adding any new rod or cog to the machine, but simply by reversing the lever. The
engine slows up and soon moves in an opposite direction to that in which it has been
going. Man needs no new faculty of love; he needs only to have his love set in a new
and holy direction; this is virtually to give him a new birth, to make him a new creature,
to impart to him a new life. But being born again, created anew, made alive
from the dead, are physical metaphors, to be interpreted not literally but spiritually.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='826'/><anchor id='Pg826'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It is objected, indeed, that we know only of mental substance and of
mental acts, and that the new disposition or state just mentioned, since it
is not an act, must be regarded as a new substance, and so lack all moral
quality. But we reply that, besides substance and acts, there are habits,
tendencies, proclivities, some of them native and some of them acquired.
They are voluntary, and have moral character. If we can by repeated
acts originate sinful tendencies, God can surely originate in us holy tendencies.
Such holy tendencies formed a part of the nature of Adam, as
he came from the hand of God. As the result of the Fall, we are born
with tendencies toward evil for which we are responsible. Regeneration
is a restoration of the original tendencies toward God which were lost by
the Fall. Such holy tendencies (tastes, dispositions, affections) are not
only not unmoral&mdash;they are the only possible springs of right moral action.
Only in the restoration of them does man become truly free.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 12:33</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Make the tree good, and its fruit good</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>created in Christ Jesus for good works.</hi></q>
The tree is first made good&mdash;the character renewed in its fundamental principle, love
to God&mdash;in the certainty that when this is done the fruit will be good also. Good
works are the necessary result of regeneration by union with Christ. Regeneration
introduces a new force into humanity, the force of a new love. The work of the
preacher is that of coöperation with God in the impartation of a new life&mdash;a work far
more radical and more noble than that of moral reform, by as much as the origination
of a new force is more radical and more noble than the guidance of that force after it
has been originated. Does regeneration cure disease and remove physical ills? Not
primarily. <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 1:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>thou shalt call his name Jesus; for it is he that shall save his people from their sins.</hi></q>
Salvation from sin is Christ's first and main work. He performed physical healing
only to illustrate and further the healing of the soul. Hence in the case of the paralytic,
when he was expected to cure the body, he said first: <q><hi rend='italic'>thy sins are forgiven</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat.
9:2</hi>); but, that they who stood by might not doubt his power to forgive, he added the
raising up of the palsied man. And ultimately in every redeemed man the holy heart
will bring in its train the perfected body: <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting
for our adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
On holy affection as the spring of holy action, see especially Edwards, Religious
Affections, in Works, 3:1-21. This treatise is Jonathan Edwards's Confessions, as much
as if it were directly addressed to the Deity. Allen, his biographer, calls it <q>a work
which will not suffer by comparison with the work of great teachers in theology,
whether ancient or modern.</q> President Timothy Dwight regarded it as most worthy
of preservation next to the Bible. See also Hodge, Essays and Reviews, 1:48; Owen
on the Holy Spirit, in Works, 3:297-336; Charnock on Regeneration; Andrew Fuller,
Works, 2:461-471, 512-560, and 3:796; Bellamy, Works, 2:502; Dwight, Works, 2:418;
Woods, Works, 3:1-21; Anderson, Regeneration, 21-50.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. It is an instantaneous change, in a region of the soul below consciousness,
and is therefore known only in its results.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It is an instantaneous change.&mdash;Regeneration is not a gradual
work. Although there may be a gradual work of God's providence and
Spirit, preparing the change, and a gradual recognition of it after it has
taken place, there must be an instant of time when, under the influence of
God's Spirit, the disposition of the soul, just before hostile to God, is
changed to love. Any other view assumes an intermediate state of indecision
which has no moral character at all, and confounds regeneration either
with conviction or with sanctification.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Conviction of sin is an ordinary, if not an invariable, antecedent of regeneration. It
results from the contemplation of truth. It is often accompanied by fear, remorse,
and cries for mercy. But these desires and fears are not signs of regeneration. They
are selfish. They are quite consistent with manifest and dreadful enmity to God.
<pb n='827'/><anchor id='Pg827'/>
They have a hopeful aspect, simply because they are evidence that the Holy Spirit is
striving with the soul. But this work of the Spirit is not yet regeneration; at most, it
is preparation for regeneration. So far as the sinner is concerned, he is more of a sinner
than ever before; because, under more light than has ever before been given him,
he is still rejecting Christ and resisting the Spirit. The word of God and the Holy
Spirit appeal to lower as well as to higher motives; most men's concern about religion
is determined, at the outset, by hope or fear. See Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:512.
</p>

<p>
All these motives, though they are not the highest, are yet proper motives to influence
the soul; it is right to seek God from motives of self-interest, and because we
desire heaven. But the seeking which not only begins, but ends, upon this lower plane,
is never successful. Until the soul gives itself to God from motives of love, it is never
saved. And so long as these preliminary motives rule, regeneration has not yet taken
place. Bible-reading, and prayers, and church-attendance, and partial reformations,
are certainly better than apathy or outbreaking sin. They may be signs that God is
working in the soul. But without complete surrender to God, they may be accompanied
with the greatest guilt and the greatest danger; simply because, under such
influences, the withholding of submission implies the most active hatred to God, and
opposition to his will. Instance cases of outward reformation that preceded regeneration,&mdash;like
that of John Bunyan, who left off swearing before his conversion. Park:
<q>The soul is a monad, and must turn all at once. If we are standing on the line, we
are yet unregenerate. We are regenerate only when we cross it.</q> There is a prevenient
grace as well as a regenerating grace. Wendelius indeed distinguished five kinds
of grace, namely, prevenient, preparatory, operant, coöperant, and perfecting.
</p>

<p>
While in some cases God's preparatory work occupies a long time, there are many
cases in which he cuts short his work in righteousness (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 9:28</hi>). Some persons are
regenerated in infancy or childhood, cannot remember a time when they did not love
Christ, and yet take long to learn that they are regenerate. Others are convicted and
converted suddenly in mature years. The best proof of regeneration is not the memory
of a past experience, however vivid and startling, but rather a present inward
love for Christ, his holiness, his servants, his work, and his word. Much sympathy
should be given to those who have been early converted, but who, from timidity, self-distrust,
or the faults of inconsistent church members, have been deterred from joining
themselves with Christian people, and so have lost all hope and joy in their religious
lives. Instance the man who, though converted in a revival of religion, was injured
by a professed Christian, and became a recluse, but cherished the memory of his dead
wife and child, kept the playthings of the one and the clothing of the other, and left
directions to have them buried with him.
</p>

<p>
As there is danger of confounding regeneration with preparatory influences of God's
Spirit, so there is danger of confounding regeneration with sanctification. Sanctification,
as the development of the new affection, is gradual and progressive. But
no <emph>beginning</emph> is progressive or gradual; and regeneration is a beginning of the new
affection. We may gradually come to the <emph>knowledge</emph> that a new affection exists, but the
knowledge of a beginning is one thing; the beginning itself is another thing. Luther
had experienced a change of heart, long before he knew its meaning or could express
his new feelings in scientific form. It is not in the sense of a gradual regeneration,
but in the sense of a gradual recognition of the fact of regeneration, and a progressive
enjoyment of its results, that <q><hi rend='italic'>the path of the righteous</hi></q> is said to be <q><hi rend='italic'>as the dawning light</hi></q>&mdash;the
morning-dawn that begins in faintness, but&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that shineth more and more unto the perfect day</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Prov. 4:18</hi>). <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 4:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the god of this world hath blinded the minds of the unbelieving, that the light of
the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, should not dawn upon them.</hi></q> Here the recognition
of God's work is described as gradual; that the work itself is instantaneous, appears
from the following <hi rend='italic'>verse 6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Seeing it is God, that said, Light shall shine out of darkness, who shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Illustrate by the unconscious crossing of the line which separates one State of the
Federal Union from another. From this doctrine of instantaneous regeneration, we
may infer the duty of reaping as well as of sowing: <hi rend='italic'>John 4:38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I sent you to reap.</hi></q> <q>It is
a mistaken notion that it takes God a long time to give increase to the seed planted in
a sinner's heart. This grows out of the idea that regeneration is a matter of <emph>training</emph>;
that a soul must be <emph>educated</emph> from a lost state into a state of salvation. Let us remember
that three thousand, whom in the morning Peter called murderers of Christ, were
before night regenerated and baptized members of his church.</q> Drummond, in his
Nat. Law in the Spir. World, remarks upon the humaneness of sudden conversion. As
<pb n='828'/><anchor id='Pg828'/>
self-limitation, self-mortification, suicide of the old nature, it is well to have it at once
done and over with, and not to die by degrees.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) This change takes place in the region of the soul below consciousness.&mdash;It
is by no means true that God's work in regeneration is always
recognized by the subject of it. On the other hand, it is never directly
perceived at all. The working of God in the human soul, since it contravenes
no law of man's being, but rather puts him in the full and normal
possession of his own powers, is secret and inscrutable. Although man is
conscious, he is not conscious of God's regenerating agency.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We know our own natural existence only through the phenomena of thought and
sense. So we know our own spiritual existence, as new creatures in Christ, only
through the new feelings and experiences of the soul. <q>The will does not need to act
solitarily, in order to act freely.</q> God acts on the will, and the resulting holiness is
true freedom. <hi rend='italic'>John 8:36</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If therefore the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.</hi></q> We have
the consciousness of freedom; but the act of God in giving us this freedom is beyond
or beneath our consciousness.
</p>

<p>
Both Luther and Calvin used the word regeneration in a loose way, confounding it
with sanctification. After the Federalists made a distinct doctrine of it, Calvinists
in general came to treat it separately. And John Wesley rescued it from identification
with sacraments, by showing its connection with the truth. E. G. Robinson: <q>Regeneration
is in one sense instantaneous, in another sense not. There is necessity of some
sort of knowledge in regeneration. The doctrine of Christ crucified is the fit instrument.
The object of religion is to produce a <emph>sound</emph> rather than an <emph>emotional</emph> experience.
Revivals of religion are valuable in just the proportion in which they produce
rational conviction and permanently righteous action.</q> But none are left unaffected
by them. <q>An arm of the magnetic needle must be attracted to the magnetic pole of
the earth, or it must be repelled,&mdash;there is no such thing as indifference. Modern
materialism, refusing to say that the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, is led to
declare that the hate of God is the beginning of wisdom</q> (Diesselhoff, Die klassische
Poesie, 8).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) This change, however, is recognized indirectly in its results.&mdash;At
the moment of regeneration, the soul is conscious only of the truth and of
its own exercises with reference to it. That God is the author of its new
affection is an inference from the new character of the exercises which it
prompts. The human side or aspect of regeneration is Conversion. This,
and the Sanctification which follows it (including the special gifts of the
Holy Spirit), are the sole evidences in any particular case that regeneration
is an accomplished fact.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Regeneration, though it is the birth of a perfect child, is still the birth of a child.
The child is to grow, and the growth is sanctification; in other words, sanctification, as
we shall see, is simply the strengthening and development of the holy affection which
begins its existence in regeneration. Hence the subject of the epistle to the <hi rend='italic'>Romans</hi>&mdash;salvation
by faith&mdash;includes not only justification by faith (<hi rend='italic'>chapters 1-7</hi>), but sanctification
by faith (<hi rend='italic'>chapters 8-16</hi>). On evidences of regeneration, see Anderson, Regeneration,
169-214, 227-295; Woods, Works, 44-55. The transition from justification by faith to
sanctification by faith is in <hi rend='italic'>chapter 8</hi> of the epistle to the <hi rend='italic'>Romans</hi>. That begins by declaring
that there is <emph>no condemnation</emph> in Christ, and ends by declaring that there is <emph>no separation</emph>
from Christ. The work of the Holy Spirit follows upon the work of Christ. See
Godet on the epistle.
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of Alexander Campbell was a protest against laying an unscriptural
emphasis on emotional states as evidences of regeneration&mdash;a protest which certain
mystical and antinomian exaggerations of evangelical teaching very justly provoked.
But Campbell went to the opposite extreme of practically excluding emotion from
religion, and of confining the work of the Holy Spirit to the conscious influence of the
truth. Disciples need to recognize a power of the Holy Spirit exerted below consciousness,
in order to explain the conscious acceptance of Christ and of his salvation.
</p>

<pb n='829'/><anchor id='Pg829'/>

<p>
William James, Varieties of Religious Experience, 271&mdash;<q>If we should conceive that
the human mind, with its different possibilities of equilibrium, might be like a many
sided solid with different surfaces on which it could lie flat, we might liken mental
revolutions to the spatial revolutions of such a body. As it is pried up, say by a lever,
from a position in which it lies on surface A, for instance, it will linger for a time
unstably half way up, and if the lever cease to urge it, it will tumble back or relapse,
under the continued pull of gravity. But if at last it rotate far enough for its centre
of gravity to pass beyond the surface A altogether, the body will fall over, on surface
B, say, and will abide there permanently. The pulls of gravity towards A have vanished,
and may now be disregarded. The polyhedron has become immune against
further attraction from this direction.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Conversion.</head>

<p>
Conversion is that voluntary change in the mind of the sinner, in which
he turns, on the one hand, from sin, and on the other hand, to Christ.
The former or negative element in conversion, namely, the turning from
sin, we denominate repentance. The latter or positive element in conversion,
namely, the turning to Christ, we denominate faith.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For account of repentance and faith as elements of conversion, see Andrew Fuller,
Works, 1:666; Luthardt, Compendium der Dogmatik, 3d ed., 201-206. The two elements
of conversion seem to be in the mind of Paul, when he writes in <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>reckon ye also
yourselves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 3:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye died, and your life is hid with
Christ in God.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> ἀποστρέφω, in <hi rend='italic'>Acts 3:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in turning away every one of you from your iniquities</hi>,</q> with
ἐπιστρέφω in <hi rend='italic'>Acts 11:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>believed</hi></q> and <q><hi rend='italic'>turned unto the Lord</hi>.</q> A candidate for ordination was
once asked which came first: regeneration or conversion. He replied very correctly:
<q>Regeneration and conversion are like the cannon-ball and the hole&mdash;they both go
through together.</q> This is true however only as to their chronological relation.
Logically the ball is first and causes the hole, not the hole first and causes the ball.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Conversion is the human side or aspect of that fundamental spiritual
change which, as viewed from the divine side, we call regeneration.
It is simply man's turning. The Scriptures recognize the voluntary activity
of the human soul in this change as distinctly as they recognize the
causative agency of God. While God turns men to himself (Ps. 85:4;
Song 1:4; Jer. 31:18; Lam. 5:21), men are exhorted to turn themselves
to God (Prov. 1:23; Is. 31:6; 59:20; Ez. 14:6; 18:32; 33:9, 11;
Joel 2:12-14). While God is represented as the author of the new heart
and the new spirit (Ps. 51:10; Ez. 11:19; 36:26), men are commanded
to make for themselves a new heart and a new spirit (Ez. 18:31; 2 Cor.
7:1; cf. Phil. 2:12, 13; Eph. 5:14).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 85:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Turn us, O God of our salvation</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Song 1:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Draw me, we will run after thee</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jer. 31:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>turn
thou me, and I shall be turned</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Lam. 5:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Turn thou us unto thee, O Jehovah, and we shall be turned.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Prov. 1:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Turn you at my reproof: Behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Is. 31:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Turn ye unto
him from whom ye have deeply revolted, O children of Israel</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>59:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And a Redeemer will come to Zion, and unto
them that turn from transgression in Jacob</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ez. 14:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Return ye, and turn yourselves from your idols</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>18:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>turn
yourselves and live</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>33:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it, and he turn not from
his way, he shall die in his iniquity</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of
Israel?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Joel 2:12-14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>turn ye unto me with all your heart.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 51:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Create in me a clean heart, O God; And renew a right spirit within me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ez. 11:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I will give
them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give
them a heart of flesh</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>36:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ez. 18:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Cast away from you all your transgressions, wherein ye have transgressed; and make you a new
heart and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 7:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Having therefore these promises,
beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Phil.
2:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God who worketh in you both to will
and to work, for his good pleasure</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ
shall shine upon thee.</hi></q>
</p>

<pb n='830'/><anchor id='Pg830'/>

<p>
When asked the way to heaven, Bishop Wilberforce replied: <q>Take the first turn to
the right, and go straight forward.</q> Phillips Brooks's conversion is described by Professor
Allen, Life, 1:266, as consisting in the resolve <q>to be true to himself, to renounce
nothing which he knew to be good, and yet bring all things captive to the obedience
of God, ... the absolute surrender of his will to God, in accordance with the example
of Christ: <q><hi rend='italic'>Lo, I am come ... to do thy will, O God</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:7</hi>).</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) This twofold method of representation can be explained only when
we remember that man's powers may be interpenetrated and quickened by
the divine, not only without destroying man's freedom, but with the result
of making man for the first time truly free. Since the relation between
the divine and the human activity is not one of chronological succession,
man is never to wait for God's working. If he is ever regenerated, it must
be in and through a movement of his own will, in which he turns to God
as unconstrainedly and with as little consciousness of God's operation upon
him, as if no such operation of God were involved in the change. And in
preaching, we are to press upon men the claims of God and their duty of
immediate submission to Christ, with the certainty that they who do so
submit will subsequently recognize this new and holy activity of their own
wills as due to a working within them of divine power.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 110:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Thy people offer themselves willingly in the day of thy power.</hi></q> The act of God is accompanied
by an activity of man. Dorner: <q>God's act initiates action.</q> There is indeed
an original changing of man's tastes and affections, and in this man is passive. But
this is only the first aspect of regeneration. In the second aspect of it&mdash;the rousing of
man's powers&mdash;God's action is accompanied by man's activity, and regeneration is but
the obverse side of conversion. Luther's word: <q>Man, in conversion, is purely passive,</q>
is true only of the first part of the change; and here, by <q>conversion,</q> Luther
means <q>regeneration.</q> Melanchthon said better: <q>Non est enim coäctio, ut voluntas
non possit repugnare: trahit Deus, sed volentem trahit.</q> See Meyer on <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>led
by the Spirit of God</hi></q>: <q>The expression,</q> Meyer says, <q>is passive, though without prejudice
to the human will, as <hi rend='italic'>verse 13</hi> proves: <q><hi rend='italic'>by the Spirit ye put to death the deeds of the body</hi>.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
As, by a well known principle of hydrostatics, the water contained in a little tube can
balance the water of a whole ocean, so God's grace can be balanced by man's will. As
sunshine on the sand produces nothing unless man sow the seed, and as a fair breeze
does not propel the vessel unless man spread the sails, so the influences of God's Spirit
require human agencies, and work through them. The Holy Spirit is sovereign,&mdash;he
bloweth where he listeth. Even though there be uniform human conditions, there will
not be uniform spiritual results. Results are often independent of human conditions
as such. This is the truth emphasized by Andrew Fuller. But this does not prevent us
from saying that, whenever God's Spirit works in regeneration, there is always accompanying
it a voluntary change in man, which we call conversion, and that this change
is as free, and as really man's own work, as if there were no divine influence upon him.
</p>

<p>
Jesus told the man with the withered hand to stretch forth his hand; it was the man's
duty to stretch it forth, not to wait for strength from God to do it. Jesus told the
man sick of the palsy to take up his bed and walk. It was that man's duty to obey the
command, not to pray for power to obey. Depend wholly upon God? Yes, as you
depend wholly upon wind when you sail, yet need to keep your sails properly set.
<q><hi rend='italic'>Work out your own salvation</hi></q> comes first in the apostle's exhortation; <q><hi rend='italic'>for it is God who worketh
in you</hi></q> follows (<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:12, 13</hi>); which means that our first business is to use our wills in
obedience; then we shall find that God has gone before us to prepare us to obey.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 11:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and men of violence take it by force.</hi></q> Conversion is
like the invasion of a kingdom. Men are not to wait for God's time, but to act at
once. Not bodily exercises are required, but impassioned earnestness of soul. Wendt,
Teaching of Jesus, 2:49-56&mdash;<q>Not injustice and violence, but energetic laying hold of
a good to which they can make no claim. It is of no avail to wait idly, or to seek laboriously
to earn it; but it is of avail to lay hold of it and to retain it. It is ready as a gift
of God for men, but men must direct their desire and will toward it.... The man
who put on the wedding garment did not earn his share of the feast thereby, yet he did
show the disposition without which he was not permitted to partake of it.</q>
</p>

<pb n='831'/><anchor id='Pg831'/>

<p>
James, Varieties of Religious Experience, 12&mdash;<q>The two main phenomena of religion,
they will say, are essentially phenomena of adolescence, and therefore synchronous
with the development of sexual life. To which the retort is easy: Even were the
asserted synchrony unrestrictedly true as a fact (which it is not), it is not only the
sexual life, but the entire higher mental life, which awakens during adolescence. One
might then as well set up the thesis that the interest in mechanics, physics, chemistry,
logic, physiology and sociology, which springs up during adolescent years along with
that in poetry and religion, is also a perversion of the sexual instinct, but this would
be too absurd. Moreover, if the argument from synchrony is to decide, what is to be
done with the fact that the religious age <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>par excellence</foreign> would seem to be old age, when
the uproar of the sexual life is past?</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) From the fact that the word <q>conversion</q> means simply <q>a turning,</q>
every turning of the Christian from sin, subsequent to the first, may, in a
subordinate sense, be denominated a conversion (Luke 22:32). Since
regeneration is not complete sanctification, and the change of governing
disposition is not identical with complete purification of the nature, such
subsequent turnings from sin are necessary consequences and evidences of
the first (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> John 13:10). But they do not, like the first, imply a change
in the governing disposition,&mdash;they are rather new manifestations of a
disposition already changed. For this reason, conversion proper, like the
regeneration of which it is the obverse side, can occur but once. The
phrase <q>second conversion,</q> even if it does not imply radical misconception
of the nature of conversion, is misleading. We prefer, therefore, to
describe these subsequent experiences, not by the term <q>conversion,</q> but
by such phrases as <q>breaking off, forsaking, returning from, neglects or
transgressions,</q> and <q>coming back to Christ, trusting anew in him.</q> It is
with repentance and faith, as elements in that first and radical change by
which the soul enters upon a state of salvation, that we have now to do.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 22:31, 32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Simon, Simon, behold, Satan asked to have you, that he might sift you as wheat: but I made supplication
for thee, that thy faith fail not; and do thou, when once thou hast turned again</hi> [A. V.: <q><hi rend='italic'>art converted</hi></q>],
<hi rend='italic'>establish thy brethren</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 13:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that is bathed</hi> [has taken a full bath] <hi rend='italic'>needeth not save to wash his
feet, but is clean every whit</hi> [as a whole].</q> Notice that Jesus here announces that only one
regeneration is needed,&mdash;what follows is not conversion but sanctification. Spurgeon
said he believed in regeneration, but not in re-regeneration. Second blessing? Yes,
and a forty-second. The stages in the Christian life are like ice, water, invisible vapor,
steam, all successive and natural results of increasing temperature, seemingly different
from one another, yet all forms of the same element.
</p>

<p>
On the relation between the divine and the human agencies, we quote a different view
from another writer: <q>God decrees to employ means which in every case are sufficient,
and which in certain cases it is foreseen will be effectual. Human action converts a
sufficient means into an effectual means. The result is not always according to the
varying use of means. The power is all of God. Man has power to resist only. There
is a universal influence of the Spirit, but the influences of the Spirit vary in different
cases, just as external opportunities do. The love of holiness is blunted, but it still
lingers. The Holy Spirit quickens it. When this love is wholly lost, sin against the
Holy Ghost results. Before regeneration there is a desire for holiness, an apprehension
of its beauty, but this is overborne by a greater love for sin. If the man does not
quickly grow worse, it is not because of positive action on his part, but only because
negatively he does not resist as he might. <q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, I stand at the door and knock</hi>.</q> God leads at
first by a resistible influence. When man yields, God leads by an irresistible influence.
The second influence of the Holy Spirit confirms the Christian's choice. This second
influence is called <q>sealing.</q> There is no necessary interval of time between the two.
Prevenient grace comes first; conversion comes after.</q>
</p>

<p>
To this view, we would reply that a partial love for holiness, and an ability to choose
it before God works effectually upon the heart, seem to contradict those Scriptures
which assert that <q><hi rend='italic'>the mind of the flesh is enmity against God</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:7</hi>), and that all good works
are the result of God's new creation (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:10</hi>). Conversion does not precede regeneration,&mdash;it
chronologically accompanies regeneration, though it logically follows it.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='832'/><anchor id='Pg832'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Repentance.</head>

<p>
Repentance is that voluntary change in the mind of the sinner in which
he turns from sin. Being essentially a change of mind, it involves a
change of view, a change of feeling, and a change of purpose. We may
therefore analyze repentance into three constituents, each succeeding term
of which includes and implies the one preceding:
</p>

<p>
A. An intellectual element,&mdash;change of view&mdash;recognition of sin as
involving personal guilt, defilement, and helplessness (Ps. 51:3, 7, 11).
If unaccompanied by the following elements, this recognition may manifest
itself in fear of punishment, although as yet there is no hatred of sin.
This element is indicated in the Scripture phrase ἐπίγνωσις ἁμαρτίας (Rom.
3:20; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 1:32).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 51:3, 11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For I know my transgressions; And my sin is ever before me.... Cast me not away from thy
presence, And take not thy Holy Spirit from me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 3:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>through the law cometh the knowledge of sin</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>1:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who, knowing the ordinance of God, that they that practise such things are worthy of death, not only do the
same, but also consent with them that practise them.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
It is well to remember that God requires us to cherish no views or emotions that
contradict the truth. He wants of us no false humility. Humility (<foreign rend='italic'>humus</foreign>) = groundness&mdash;a
coming down to the hard-pan of facts&mdash;a facing of the truth. Repentance,
therefore, is not a calling ourselves by hard names. It is not cringing, or exaggerated
self-contempt. It is simple recognition of what we are. The <q>'umble</q> Uriah Heep
is the arrant hypocrite. If we see ourselves as God sees us, we shall say with <hi rend='italic'>Job 42:5, 6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I
had heard of thee by the hearing of the ear; But now mine eye seeth thee: Wherefore I abhor myself, And repent
in dust and ashes.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Apart from God's working in the heart there is no proper recognition of sin, either
in people of high or low degree. Lady Huntington invited the Duchess of Buckingham
to come and hear Whitefield, when the Duchess answered: <q>It is monstrous to be
told that you have a heart as sinful as the common wretches that crawl on the earth,&mdash;it
is highly offensive and insulting.</q> Mr. Moody, after preaching to the prisoners in
the jail at Chicago, visited them in their cells. In the first cell he found two, playing
cards. They said false witnesses had testified against them. In the second cell, the
convict said that the guilty man had escaped, but that he, a mere accomplice, had been
caught. In the last cell only Mr. Moody found a man crying over his sins. Henry
Drummond, after hearing the confessions of inquirers, said: <q>I am sick of the sins of
these men,&mdash;how can God bear it?</q>
</p>

<p>
Experience of sin does not teach us to recognize sin. We do not learn to know chloroform
by frequently inhaling it. The drunkard does not understand the degrading
effects of drink so well as his miserable wife and children do. Even the natural conscience
does not give the recognition of sin that is needed in true repentance. The
confession <q><hi rend='italic'>I have sinned</hi></q> is made by hardened Pharaoh (<hi rend='italic'>Ex. 9:27</hi>), double minded Balaam
(<hi rend='italic'>Num. 22:34</hi>), remorseful Achan (<hi rend='italic'>Josh. 7:20</hi>), insincere King Saul (<hi rend='italic'>1 Sam. 15:24</hi>), despairing
Judas (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 27:4</hi>); but in no one of these cases was there true repentance. True repentance
takes God's part against ourselves, has sympathy with God, feels how unworthily
the Ruler, Father, Friend of men has been treated. It does not ask, <q>What will my sin
bring to me?</q> but, <q>What does my sin mean to God?</q> It involves, in addition to
the mere recognition of sin:
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. An emotional element,&mdash;change of feeling&mdash;sorrow for sin as committed
against goodness and justice, and therefore hateful to God, and
hateful in itself (Ps. 51:1, 2, 10, 14). This element of repentance is indicated
in the Scripture word μεταμέλομαι. If accompanied by the following
element, it is a λύπη κατὰ Θεόν. If not so accompanied, it is a λύπη τοῦ κόσμου
= remorse and despair (Mat. 27:3; Luke 18:23; 2 Cor. 7:9, 10).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 51:1, 2, 10, 14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Have mercy upon me ... blot out my transgressions. Wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, And cleanse me from my sin.... Create in me a clean heart, O God; ... Deliver me from bloodguiltiness,
O God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 27:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Then Judas, who betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and
brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, saying, I have sinned in that I betrayed innocent
<pb n='833'/><anchor id='Pg833'/>
blood</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 18:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when he heard these things, he became exceeding sorrowful; for he was very rich</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor.
7:9, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I now rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye were made sorry unto repentance; for ye were made
sorry after a godly sort.... For godly sorrow worketh repentance unto salvation, a repentance which bringeth no
regret: but the sorrow of the world worketh death.</hi></q> We must distinguish sorrow for sin from shame
on account of it and fear of its consequences. These last are selfish, while godly sorrow
is disinterested. <q>A man may be angry with himself and may despise himself without
any humble prostration before God or confession of his guilt</q> (Shedd, Dogm. Theol.,
2:535, note).
</p>

<p>
True repentance, as illustrated in <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 51</hi>, does not think of 1. consequences, 2. other
men, 3. heredity, as an excuse; but it sees sin as 1. transgression against God, 2. personal
guilt, 3. defiling the inmost being. Perowne on <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 51:1</hi>&mdash;<q>In all godly sorrow
there is hope. Sorrow without hope may be remorse or despair, but it is not repentance.</q>
Much so-called repentance is illustrated by the little girl's prayer: <q>O God,
make me good,&mdash;not real good, but just good enough so that I won't have to be
whipped!</q> Shakespeare, Measure for Measure, 2:3&mdash;<q>'Tis meet so, daughter; but
lest you do repent As that the sin hath brought you to this shame, Which sorrow is
always towards ourselves, not heaven, Showing we would not spare heaven as we love
it, But as we stand in fear.... I do repent me as it is an evil, And take the shame
with joy.</q> Tempest, 3:3&mdash;<q>For which foul deed, the Powers delaying, not forgetting,
Have incensed the seas, and shores, yea, all the creatures, Against your peace....
Whose wrath to guard you from ... is nothing but heart's sorrow And a clear life
ensuing.</q>
</p>

<p>
Simon, Reconciliation, 195, 379&mdash;<q>At the very bottom it is God whose claims are
advocated, whose part is taken, by that in us which, whilst most truly our own, yea,
our very selves, is also most truly his, and of him. The divine energy and idea which
constitutes us will not let its own root and source suffer wrong unatoned. God intends
us to be givers as well as receivers, givers even to him. We share in his image that we
may be creators and givers, not from compulsion, but in love.</q> Such repentance as
this is wrought only by the Holy Spirit. Conscience indeed is present in every human
heart, but only the Holy Spirit convinces of sin. Why is the Holy Spirit needed? A. J.
Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 189-201&mdash;<q>Conscience is the witness to the law; the
Spirit is the witness to grace. Conscience brings legal conviction; the Spirit brings
evangelical conviction. The one begets a conviction unto despair; the other a
conviction unto hope. Conscience convinces of sin committed, of righteousness
impossible, of judgment impending; the Comforter convinces of sin committed, of
righteousness imputed, of judgment accomplished&mdash;in Christ. God alone can reveal
the divine view of sin, and enable man to understand it.</q> But, however agonizing the
sorrow, it will not constitute true repentance, unless it leads to, or is accompanied by:
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. A voluntary element,&mdash;change of purpose&mdash;inward turning from
sin and disposition to seek pardon and cleansing (Ps. 51:5, 7, 10; Jer.
25:5). This includes and implies the two preceding elements, and is
therefore the most important aspect of repentance. It is indicated in the
Scripture term μετάνοια (Acts 2:38; Rom. 2:4).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 51:5, 7, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity; And in sin did my mother conceive me.... Purge me
with hyssop, and I shall be clean: Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.... Create in me a clean heart, O God;
And renew a right spirit within me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jer. 25:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Return ye now every one from his evil way, and from the evil of
your doings</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And Peter said unto them, Repent ye, and be baptized every one of you in the name of
Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 2:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering, not knowing
that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Walden, The Great Meaning of <hi rend='italic'>Metanoia</hi>, brings out well the fact that <q>repentance</q>
is not the true translation of the word, but rather <q>change of mind</q>; indeed, he
would give up the word <q>repentance</q> altogether in the N. T., except as the translation
of μεταμέλεια. The idea of μετάνοια is abandonment of sin rather than sorrow for sin,&mdash;an
act of the will rather than a state of the sensibility. Repentance is participation in
Christ's revulsion from sin and suffering on account of it. It is repentance <emph>from</emph> sin,
not <emph>of</emph> sin, nor <emph>for</emph> sin&mdash;always ἀπό and ἔκ, never περί or ἐπί. The true illustrations of
repentance are found in Job (<hi rend='italic'>42:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I abhor myself, And repent in dust and ashes</hi></q>); in David (<hi rend='italic'>Ps.
51:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Create in me a clean heart; And renew a right spirit within me</hi></q>); in Peter (<hi rend='italic'>John 21:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>thou
knowest that I love thee</hi></q>); in the penitent thief (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 23:42</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Jesus, remember me when thou comest in
thy kingdom</hi></q>); in the prodigal son (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 15:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I will arise and go to my Father</hi></q>).
</p>

<pb n='834'/><anchor id='Pg834'/>

<p>
Repentance implies free will. Hence Spinoza, who knows nothing of free will,
knows nothing of repentance. In book 4 of his Ethics, he says: <q>Repentance is not a
virtue, that is, it does not spring from reason; on the contrary, the man who repents
of what he has done is doubly wretched or impotent.</q> Still he urges that for the good
of society it is not desirable that vulgar minds should be enlightened as to this matter;
see Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 315. Determinism also renders it irrational to feel righteous
indignation either at the misconduct of other people or of ourselves. Moral
admiration is similarly irrational in the determinist; see Balfour, Foundations of
Belief, 24.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In broad distinction from the Scriptural doctrine, we find the Romanist
view, which regards the three elements of repentance as the following:
(1) contrition; (2) confession; (3) satisfaction. Of these, contrition is
the only element properly belonging to repentance; yet from this contrition
the Romanist excludes all sorrow for sin of nature. Confession is confession
to the priest; and satisfaction is the sinner's own doing of outward
penance, as a temporal and symbolic submission and reparation to violated
law. This view is false and pernicious, in that it confounds repentance
with its outward fruits, conceives of it as exercised rather toward the church
than toward God, and regards it as a meritorious ground, instead of a mere
condition, of pardon.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On the Romanist doctrine of Penance, Thornwell (Collected Writings, 1:423)
remarks: <q>The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>culpa</foreign> may be remitted, they say, while the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pœna</foreign> is to some extent
retained.</q> The priest absolves, not declaratively, but judicially. Denying the greatness
of the sin, it makes man able to become his own Savior. Christ's satisfaction, for
sins after baptism, is not sufficient; our satisfaction is sufficient. But performance of
one duty, we object, cannot make satisfaction for the violation of another.
</p>

<p>
We are required to confess one to another, and specially to those whom we have
wronged: <hi rend='italic'>James 5:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Confess therefore your sins one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be
healed.</hi></q> This puts the hardest stress upon our natural pride. There are a hundred who
will confess to a priest or to God, where there is one who will make frank and full
confession to the aggrieved party. Confession to an official religious superior is not
penitence nor a test of penitence. In the Confessional women expose their inmost
desires to priests who are forbidden to marry. These priests are sometimes, though
gradually, corrupted to the core, and at the same time they are taught in the Confessional
precisely to what women to apply. In France many noble families will not
permit their children to confess, and their women are not permitted to incur the danger.
</p>

<p>
Lord Salisbury in the House of Lords said of auricular confession: <q>It has been
injurious to the moral independence and virility of the nation to an extent to which
probably it has been given to no other institution to affect the character of mankind.</q>
See Walsh, Secret History of the Oxford Movement; A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the
Spirit, 111&mdash;<q>Asceticism is an absolute inversion of the divine order, since it seeks life
through death, instead of finding death through life. No degree of mortification can
ever bring us to sanctification.</q> Penance can never effect true repentance, nor be
other than a hindrance to the soul's abandonment of sin. Penance is something external
to be done, and it diverts attention from the real inward need of the soul. The
monk does penance by sleeping on an iron bed and by wearing a hair shirt. When
Anselm of Canterbury died, his under garments were found alive with vermin which
the saint had cultivated in order to mortify the flesh. Dr. Pusey always sat on a hard
chair, traveled as uncomfortably as possible, looked down when he walked, and whenever
he saw a coal-fire thought of hell. Thieves do penance by giving a part of their
ill-gotten wealth to charity. In all these things there is no transformation of the
inner life.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In further explanation of the Scripture representations, we remark:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That repentance, in each and all of its aspects, is wholly an inward
act, not to be confounded with the change of life which proceeds from it.
</p>

<p>
True repentance is indeed manifested and evidenced by confession of sin
before God (Luke 18:13), and by reparation for wrongs done to men
<pb n='835'/><anchor id='Pg835'/>
(Luke 19:8). But these do not constitute repentance; they are rather
fruits of repentance. Between <q>repentance</q> and <q>fruit worthy of repentance,</q>
Scripture plainly distinguishes (Mat. 3:8).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 18:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote his
breast, saying, God, be thou merciful to me a sinner</hi> [<q>be propitiated to me the sinner</q>]</q>; <hi rend='italic'>19:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And
Zacchæus stood, and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have wrongfully
exacted aught of any man, I restore fourfold</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Bring forth therefore fruit worthy of repentance.</hi></q> Fruit
worthy of repentance, or fruits meet for repentance, are: 1. Confession of sin; 2. Surrender
to Christ; 3. Turning from sin; 4. Reparation for wrong doing; 5. Right moral
conduct; 6. Profession of Christian faith.
</p>

<p>
On <hi rend='italic'>Luke 17:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if thy brother sin, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him</hi></q>&mdash;Dr. B. H. Carroll
remarks that the law is uniform which makes repentance indispensable to forgiveness.
It applies to man's forgiveness of man, as well as to God's forgiveness of man, or the
church's forgiveness of man. But I must be sure that I cherish toward the offender
the spirit of love, whether he repents or not. Freedom from all malice toward him,
however, and even loving prayerful labor to lead him to repentance, is not forgiveness.
This I can grant only when he actually repents. If I do forgive him without repentance,
then I impose my rule on God when I pray: <q><hi rend='italic'>Forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven
our debtors</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 6:12</hi>).
</p>

<p>
On the question whether the requirement that we forgive without atonement implies
that God does, see Brit. and For. Evang. Rev., Oct 1881:678-691&mdash;<q>Answer: 1. The
present constitution of things is based upon atonement. Forgiveness on our part is
required upon the ground of the Cross, without which the world would be hell. 2. God
is Judge. We forgive, as brethren. When he forgives, it is as Judge of all the earth,
of whom all earthly judges are representatives. If earthly judges may exact justice,
much more God. The argument that would abolish atonement would abolish all civil
government. 3. I should forgive my brother on the ground of God's love, and Christ's
bearing of his sins. 4. God, who requires atonement, is the same being that provides
it. This is <q>handsome and generous.</q> But I can never provide atonement for my
brother. I must, therefore, forgive freely, only upon the ground of what Christ has
done for him.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That repentance is only a negative condition, and not a positive
means of salvation.
</p>

<p>
This is evident from the fact that repentance is no more than the sinner's
present duty, and can furnish no offset to the claims of the law on account
of past transgression. The truly penitent man feels that his repentance has
no merit. Apart from the positive element of conversion, namely, faith in
Christ, it would be only sorrow for guilt unremoved. This very sorrow,
moreover, is not the mere product of human will, but is the gift of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 5:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Him did God exalt with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and
remission of sins</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>11:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Then to the Gentiles also hath God granted repentance unto life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 2:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if
peradventure God may give them repentance unto the knowledge of the truth.</hi></q> The truly penitent man
recognizes the fact that his sin deserves punishment. He never regards his penitence
as offsetting the demands of law, and as making his punishment unjust. Whitefield:
<q>Our repentance needeth to be repented of, and our very tears to be washed in the
blood of Christ.</q> Shakespeare, Henry V, 4:1&mdash;<q>More will I do: Though all that I can
do is nothing worth, Since that my penitence comes after all, Imploring pardon</q>&mdash;imploring
pardon both for the crime and for the imperfect repentance.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That true repentance, however, never exists except in conjunction
with faith.
</p>

<p>
Sorrow for sin, not simply on account of its evil consequences to the
transgressor, but on account of its intrinsic hatefulness as opposed to divine
holiness and love, is practically impossible without some confidence in
God's mercy. It is the Cross which first makes us truly penitent (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> John
12:32, 33). Hence all true preaching of repentance is implicitly a preaching
<pb n='836'/><anchor id='Pg836'/>
of faith (Mat. 3:1-12; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Acts 19:4), and repentance toward God
involves faith in the Lord Jesus Christ (Acts 20:21; Luke 15:10, 24;
19:8, 9; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Gal. 3:7).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 12:32, 33</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto myself. But this he said, signifying
by what manner of death he should die.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:1-12</hi>&mdash;John the Baptist's preaching of repentance
was also a preaching of faith; as is shown by <hi rend='italic'>Acts 19:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>John baptized with the baptism of
repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe on him that should come after him, that is, on Jesus.</hi></q>
Repentance involves faith: <hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>testifying both to Jews and to Greeks repentance toward God, and
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 15:10, 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner
that repenteth.... this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>19:8, 9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the half
of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have wrongfully exacted aught of any man, I restore fourfold. And Jesus said
unto him, To-day is salvation come to this house, forasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham</hi></q>&mdash;the father of all
believers; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 3:6, 7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Even as Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned unto him for righteousness. Know
therefore that they that are of faith, the same are sons of Abraham.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 3:18</hi> says of John the Baptist: <q><hi rend='italic'>he preached the gospel unto the people</hi>,</q> and the gospel message,
the glad tidings, is more than the command to repent,&mdash;it is also the offer of
salvation through Christ; see Prof. Wm. Arnold Stevens, on John the Baptist and his
Gospel, in Studies on the Gospel according to John. <hi rend='italic'>2 Chron. 34:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And it came to pass, when
the king had heard the words of the law, that he rent his clothes.</hi></q> Moberly, Atonement and Personality,
44-46&mdash;<q>Just in proportion as one sins, does he render it impossible for him truly to
repent. Repentance must be the work of another in him. Is it not the Spirit of the
Crucified which is the reality of the penitence of the truly penitent?</q> If this be true,
then it is plain that there is no true repentance which is not accompanied by the faith
that unites us to Christ.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) That, conversely, wherever there is true faith, there is true repentance
also.
</p>

<p>
Since repentance and faith are but different sides or aspects of the same
act of turning, faith is as inseparable from repentance as repentance is from
faith. That must be an unreal faith where there is no repentance, just as
that must be an unreal repentance where there is no faith. Yet because
the one aspect of his change is more prominent in the mind of the convert
than the other, we are not hastily to conclude that the other is absent.
Only that degree of conviction of sin is essential to salvation, which carries
with it a forsaking of sin and a trustful surrender to Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Bishop Hall: <q>Never will Christ enter into that soul where the herald of repentance
hath not been before him.</q> <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 7:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>repentance unto salvation.</hi></q> In consciousness, sensation
and perception are in inverse ratio to each other. Clear vision is hardly conscious
of sensation, but inflamed eyes are hardly conscious of anything besides sensation. So
repentance and faith are seldom equally prominent in the consciousness of the converted
man; but it is important to know that neither can exist without the other.
The truly penitent man will, sooner or later, show that he has faith; and the true
believer will certainly show, in due season, that he hates and renounces sin.
</p>

<p>
The question, how much conviction a man needs to insure his salvation, may be
answered by asking how much excitement one needs on a burning steamer. As, in the
latter case, just enough to prompt persistent effort to escape; so, in the former case,
just enough remorseful feeling is needed, to induce the sinner to betake himself believingly
to Christ.
</p>

<p>
On the general subject of Repentance, see Anderson, Regeneration, 279-288; Bp.
Ossory, Nature and Effects of Faith, 40-48, 311-318; Woods, Works, 3:68-78; Philippi,
Glaubenslehre, 5:1-10, 208-246; Luthardt, Compendium, 3d ed., 206-208; Hodge, Outlines
of Theology, 375-381; Alexander, Evidences of Christianity, 47-60; Crawford,
Atonement, 413-419.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Faith.</head>

<p>
Faith is that voluntary change in the mind of the sinner in which he
turns to Christ. Being essentially a change of mind, it involves a change
<pb n='837'/><anchor id='Pg837'/>
of view, a change of feeling, and a change of purpose. We may therefore
analyze faith also into three constituents, each succeeding term of which
includes and implies the preceding:
</p>

<p>
A. An intellectual element (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>notitia, credere Deum</foreign>),&mdash;recognition of
the truth of God's revelation, or of the objective reality of the salvation
provided by Christ. This includes not only a historical belief in the facts
of the Scripture, but an intellectual belief in the doctrine taught therein
as to man's sinfulness and dependence upon Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 2:23, 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>How when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, during the feast, many believed on his name,
beholding his signs which he did. But Jesus did not trust himself unto them, for that he knew all men</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>3:2</hi>&mdash;Nicodemus
has this external faith: <q><hi rend='italic'>no one can do these signs that thou doest, except God be with him</hi>.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>James 2:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Thou believest that God is one; thou doest well: the demons also believe, and shudder.</hi></q> Even this
historical faith is not without its fruits. It is the spring of much philanthropic work.
There were no hospitals in ancient Rome. Much of our modern progress is due to the
leavening influence of Christianity, even in the case of those who have not personally
accepted Christ.
</p>

<p>
McLaren, S. S. Times, Feb. 22, 1902:107&mdash;<q>Luke does not hesitate to say, in <hi rend='italic'>Acts 8:13</hi>,
that <q><hi rend='italic'>Simon Magus also himself believed</hi>.</q> But he expects us to understand that Simon's belief
was not faith that saved, but mere credence in the gospel narrative as true history. It
had no ethical or spiritual worth. He was <q><hi rend='italic'>amazed</hi>,</q> as the Samaritans had been at his
juggleries. It did not lead to repentance, or confession, or true trust. He was only
<q><hi rend='italic'>amazed</hi></q> at Philip's miracles, and there was no salvation in that.</q> Merely historical
faith, such as Disciples and Ritschlians hold to, lacks the element of affection, and
besides this lacks the present reality of Christ himself. Faith that does not lay hold of
a present Christ is not saving faith.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. An emotional element (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>assensus, credere Deo</foreign>),&mdash;assent to the
revelation of God's power and grace in Jesus Christ, as applicable to the
present needs of the soul. Those in whom this awakening of the sensibilities
is unaccompanied by the fundamental decision of the will, which constitutes
the next element of faith, may seem to themselves, and for a time
may appear to others, to have accepted Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 13:20, 21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that was sown upon the rocky places, this is he that heareth the word, and straightway with
joy receiveth it; yet hath he not root in himself, but endureth for a while; and when tribulation or persecution ariseth
because of the word, straightway he stumbleth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 106:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Then believed they his words; they sang his
praise. They soon forgat his works; they waited not for his counsel</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ez. 33:31, 32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And they come unto thee as
the people cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but do them not; for with their
mouth they show much love, but their heart goeth after their gain. And, lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song
of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument; for they hear thy words, but they do them not</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>John 5:35</hi>&mdash;Of John the Baptist: <q><hi rend='italic'>He was the lamp that burneth and shineth; and ye were willing to rejoice
for a season in his light</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>8:30, 31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>As he spake these things, many believed on him</hi> (εἰς αὐτόν). <hi rend='italic'>Jesus therefore
said to those Jews that had believed him</hi> (αὐτῷ), <hi rend='italic'>If ye abide in my word, then are ye truly my disciples.</hi></q> They
believed <emph>him</emph>, but did not yet believe <emph>on</emph> him, that is, make him the foundation of their
faith and life. Yet Jesus graciously recognizes this first faint foreshadowing of faith.
It might lead to full and saving faith.
</p>

<p>
<q>Proselytes of the gate</q> were so called, because they contented themselves with
sitting in the gate, as it were, without going into the holy city. <q>Proselytes of righteousness</q>
were those who did their whole duty, by joining themselves fully to the
people of God. Not <emph>emotion</emph>, but <emph>devotion</emph>, is the important thing. Temporary faith is
as irrational and valueless as temporary repentance. It perhaps gained temporary
blessing in the way of healing in the time of Christ, but, if not followed by complete
surrender of the will, it might even aggravate one's sin; see <hi rend='italic'>John 5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, thou art
made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee.</hi></q> The special faith of miracles was not a high,
but a low, form of faith, and it is not to be sought in our day as indispensable to the
progress of the kingdom. Miracles have ceased, not because of decline in faith, but
because the Holy Spirit has changed the method of his manifestations, and has led the
church to seek more spiritual gifts.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='838'/><anchor id='Pg838'/>

<p>
Saving faith, however, includes also:
</p>

<p>
C. A voluntary element (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fiducia, credere in Deum</foreign>),&mdash;trust in Christ
as Lord and Savior; or, in other words&mdash;to distinguish its two aspects:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Surrender of the soul, as guilty and defiled, to Christ's governance.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 11:28, 29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke
upon you, and learn of me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 8:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in the
darkness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>14:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Let not your heart be troubled: believe in God, believe also in me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 16:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Believe on
the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved.</hi></q> Instances of the use of πιστεύω, in the sense of trustful
committance or surrender, are: <hi rend='italic'>John 2:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But Jesus did not trust himself unto them, for that he knew
all men</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 3:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they were intrusted with the oracles of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 2:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when they saw that I had been
intrusted with the gospel of the uncircumcision.</hi></q> πίστις = <q>trustful self-surrender to God</q> (Meyer).
</p>

<p>
In this surrender of the soul to Christ's governance we have the guarantee that the
gospel salvation is not an unmoral trust which permits continuance in sin. Aside from
the fact that saving faith is only the obverse side of true repentance, the very nature
of faith, as submission to Christ, the embodied law of God and source of spiritual life,
makes a life of obedience and virtue to be its natural and necessary result. Faith is
not only a declaration of dependence, it is also a vow of allegiance. The sick man's
faith in his physician is shown not simply by trusting him, but by obeying him. Doing
what the doctor says is the very proof of trust. No physician will long care for a
patient who refuses to obey his orders. Faith is self-surrender to the great Physician,
and a leaving of our case in his hands. But it is also the taking of his prescriptions,
and the active following of his directions.
</p>

<p>
We need to emphasize this active element in saving faith, lest men get the notion
that mere indolent acquiescence in Christ's plan will save them. Faith is not simple
receptiveness. It gives itself, as well as receives Christ. It is not mere passivity,&mdash;it
is also self-committal. As all reception of knowledge is active, and there must be
attention if we would learn, so all reception of Christ is active, and there must be intelligent
giving as well as taking. The Watchman, April 30, 1896&mdash;<q>Faith is more than
belief and trust. It is the action of the soul going out toward its object. It is the
exercise of a spiritual faculty akin to that of sight; it establishes a personal relation
between the one who exercises faith and the one who is its object. When the intellectual
feature predominates, we call it belief; when the emotional element predominates,
we call it trust. This faith is at once <q>An affirmation and an act Which bids
eternal truth be present fact.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
There are great things received in faith, but nothing is received by the man who does
not first give himself to Christ. A conquered general came into the presence of his
conqueror and held out to him his hand: <q>Your sword first, sir!</q> was the response.
But when General Lee <emph>offered</emph> his sword to General Grant at Appomattox, the latter
returned it, saying: <q>No, keep your sword, and go to your home.</q> Jacobi said that
<q>Faith is the reflection of the divine knowing and willing in the finite spirit of man.</q>
G. B. Foster, in Indiana Baptist Outlook, June 19, 1902&mdash;<q>Catholic orthodoxy is wrong
in holding that the authority for faith is the church; for that would be an external
authority. Protestant orthodoxy is wrong in holding that the authority for faith is
the book; for that would be an external authority. Liberalism is wrong in holding
that the reason is the authority for faith. The authority for faith is the revelation of
God.</q> Faith in this revelation is faith in Christ the Revealer. It puts the soul in connection
with the source of all knowledge and power. As the connection of a wire with
the reservoir of electric force makes it the channel of vast energies, so the smallest
measure of faith, any real connection of the soul with Christ, makes it the recipient of
divine resources.
</p>

<p>
While faith is the act of the whole man, and intellect, affection, and will are involved
in it, will is the all-inclusive and most important of its elements. No other exercise of
will is such a revelation of our being and so decisive of our destiny. The voluntary
element in faith is illustrated in marriage. Here one party pledges the future in permanent
self-surrender, commits one's self to another person in confidence that this
future, with all its new revelations of character, will only justify the decision made.
Yet this is rational; see Holland, in Lux Mundi, 46-48. To put one's hand into molten
iron, even though one knows of the <q>spheroidal state</q> that gives impunity, requires
an exertion of will; and not all workmen in metals are courageous enough to make
the venture. The child who leaped into the dark cellar, in confidence that her father's
arms would be open to receive her, did not act irrationally, because she had heard her
<pb n='839'/><anchor id='Pg839'/>
father's command and trusted his promise. Though faith in Christ is a leap in the
dark, and requires a mighty exercise of will, it is nevertheless the highest wisdom,
because Christ's word is pledged that <q><hi rend='italic'>him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 6:37</hi>).
</p>

<p>
J. W. A. Stewart: <q>Faith is 1. a bond between persons, trust, confidence; 2. it makes
ventures, takes much for granted; 3. its security is the character and power of him in
whom we believe,&mdash;not our faith, but his fidelity, is the guarantee that our faith is
rational.</q> Kant said that nothing in the world is good but the good will which freely
obeys the law of the good. Pfleiderer defines faith as the free surrender of the heart
to the gracious will of God. Kaftan, Dogmatik, 21, declares that the Christian religion
is essentially faith, and that this faith manifests itself as 1. doctrine; 2. worship; 3.
morality.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Reception and appropriation of Christ, as the source of pardon and
spiritual life.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 1:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as many as received him, to them gave he the right to become children of God, even to them that
believe on his name</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>4:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the
water that I shall give him shall become in him a well of water springing up unto eternal life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>6:53</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have not life in yourselves</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>20:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>these are written, that
ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye may have life in his name</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 3:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that
Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 11:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now faith is assurance of things hoped for,
a conviction of things not seen</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 3:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice and
open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
The three constituents of faith may be illustrated from the thought, feeling, and
action of a person who stands by a boat, upon a little island which the rising stream
threatens to submerge. He first regards the boat from a purely intellectual point of
view,&mdash;it is merely an <emph>actually existing boat</emph>. As the stream rises, he looks at it, secondly,
with some accession of emotion,&mdash;his prospective danger awakens in him the
conviction that it is a <emph>good boat for a time of need</emph>, though he is not yet ready to make
use of it. But, thirdly, when he feels that the rushing tide must otherwise sweep him
away, a volitional element is added,&mdash;he gets into the boat, trusts himself to it, accepts
it as his <emph>present, and only, means of safety</emph>. Only this last faith in the boat is faith that
saves, although this last includes both the preceding. It is equally clear that the getting
into the boat may actually save a man, while at the same time he may be full of
fears that the boat will never bring him to shore. These fears may be removed by the
boatman's word. So saving faith is not necessarily assurance of faith; but it becomes
assurance of faith when the Holy Spirit <q><hi rend='italic'>beareth witness with our spirit, that we are children of God</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:16</hi>). On the nature of this assurance, and on the distinction between it and saving
faith, see pages <ref target='Pg844'>844-846</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Coming to Christ,</q> <q>looking to Christ,</q> <q>receiving Christ,</q> are all descriptions of
faith, as are also the phrases: <q>surrender to Christ,</q> <q>submission to Christ,</q> <q>closing
in with Christ.</q> Paul refers to a confession of faith in <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 10:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if thou shalt confess with
thy mouth Jesus as Lord.</hi></q> Faith, then, is a taking of Christ as both Savior and Lord; and it
includes both appropriation of Christ, and consecration to Christ. The voluntary element
in faith, however, is a giving as well as a taking. The giving, or surrender, is
illustrated in baptism by submergence; the taking, or reception, by emergence. See
further on the Symbolism of Baptism. McCosh, Div. Government: <q>Saving faith is the
consent of the will to the assent of the understanding, and commonly accompanied with
emotion.</q> Pres. Hopkins, in Princeton Rev., Sept. 1878:511-540&mdash;<q>In its intellectual
element, faith is receptive, and believes that God <emph>is</emph>; in its affectional element, faith is
assimilative, and believes that God is a <emph>rewarder</emph>; in its voluntary element, faith is
operative, and actually <emph>comes</emph> to God (<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 11:6</hi>).</q>
</p>

<p>
Where the element of surrender is emphasized and the element of reception is not
understood, the result is a legalistic experience, with little hope or joy. Only as we
<emph>appropriate</emph> Christ, in connection with our <emph>consecration</emph>, do we realize the full blessing
of the gospel. Light requires two things: the sun to shine, and the eye to take in its
shining. So we cannot be saved without Christ to save, and faith to take the Savior
for ours. Faith is the act by which we receive Christ. The woman who touched the
border of Jesus' garment received his healing power. It is better still to keep in touch
with Christ so as to receive continually his grace and life. But best of all is taking him
into our inmost being, to be the soul of our soul and the life of our life. This is the
essence of faith, though many Christians do not yet realize it. Dr. Curry said well that
faith can never be defined because it is a fact of life. It is a merging of our life in the
<pb n='840'/><anchor id='Pg840'/>
life of Christ, and a reception of Christ's life to interpenetrate and energize ours. In
faith we must take Christ as well as give ourselves. It is certainly true that surrender
without trust will not make us possessors of God's peace. F. L. Anderson: <q>Faith is
submissive reliance on Jesus Christ for salvation: 1. Reliance on Jesus Christ&mdash;not
mere intellectual belief; 2. Reliance on him for salvation&mdash;we can never undo the
past or atone for our sins; 3. Submissive reliance on Christ. Trust without surrender
will never save.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The passages already referred to refute the view of the Romanist, that
saving faith is simply implicit assent to the doctrines of the church; and
the view of the Disciple or Campbellite, that faith is merely intellectual
belief in the truth, on the presentation of evidence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Romanist says that faith can coëxist with mortal sin. The Disciple holds that
faith may and must exist before regeneration,&mdash;regeneration being completed in baptism.
With these erroneous views, compare the noble utterance of Luther, Com. on
Galatians, 1:191, 247, quoted in Thomasius, III, 2:183&mdash;<q>True faith,</q> says Luther, <q>is
that assured trust and firm assent of heart, by which Christ is laid hold of,&mdash;so that
Christ is the object of faith. Yet he is not merely the object of faith; but in the very
faith, so to speak, Christ is present. Faith lays hold of Christ, and grasps him as a present
possession, just as the ring holds the jewel.</q> Edwards, Works, 4:71-73; 2:601-641&mdash;<q>Faith,</q>
says Edwards, <q>includes the whole act of unition to Christ as a Savior. The
entire active uniting of the soul, or the whole of what is called coming to Christ, and
receiving of him, is called faith in the Scripture.</q> See also Belief, What Is It? 150-179,
290-298.
</p>

<p>
Hatch, Hibbert Lectures, 530&mdash;<q>Faith began by being: 1. a simple trust in God;
then followed, 2. a simple expansion of that proposition into the assent to the proposition
that God is good, and, 3. a simple acceptance of the proposition that Jesus Christ
was his Son; then, 4. came in the definition of terms, and each definition of terms
involved a new theory; finally, 5. the theories were gathered together into systems,
and the martyrs and witnesses of Christ died for their faith, not outside but inside the
Christian sphere; and instead of a world of religious belief which resembled the world
of actual fact in the sublime unsymmetry of its foliage and the deep harmony of its
discords, there prevailed the most fatal assumption of all, that the symmetry of a
system is the test of its truth and the proof thereof.</q> We regard this statement of
Hatch as erroneous, in that it attributes to the earliest disciples no larger faith than
that of their Jewish brethren. We claim that the earliest faith involved an implicit
acknowledgement of Jesus as Savior and Lord, and that this faith of simple obedience
and trust became explicit recognition of our Lord's deity and atonement just so soon
as persecution and the Holy Spirit disclosed to them the real contents of their own
consciousness.
</p>

<p>
An illustration of the simplicity and saving power of faith is furnished by Principal
J. R. Andrews, of New London, Conn., Principal of the Bartlett Grammar School. When
the steamer Atlantic was wrecked off Fisher's Island, though Mr. Andrews could not
swim, he determined to make a desperate effort to save his life. Binding a life-preserver
about him, he stood on the edge of the deck waiting his opportunity, and when he saw
a wave moving shoreward, he jumped into the rough breakers and was borne safely to
land. He was saved by faith. He accepted the conditions of salvation. Forty perished
in a scene where he was saved. In one sense he saved himself; in another sense he
depended upon God. It was a combination of personal activity and dependence upon
God that resulted in his salvation. If he had not used the life-preserver, he would have
perished; if he had not cast himself into the sea, he would have perished. So faith in
Christ is reliance upon him for salvation; but it is also our own making of a new start
in life and the showing of our trust by action. Tract 357, Am. Tract Society&mdash;<q>What
is it to believe on Christ? It is: To feel your need of him; To believe that he is able
and willing to save you, and to save you now; and To cast yourself unreservedly upon
his mercy, and trust in him alone for salvation.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In further explanation of the Scripture representations, we remark:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That faith is an act of the affections and will, as truly as it is an act
of the intellect.
</p>

<pb n='841'/><anchor id='Pg841'/>

<p>
It has been claimed that faith and unbelief are purely intellectual states,
which are necessarily determined by the facts at any given time presented
to the mind; and that they are, for this reason, as destitute of moral quality
and as far from being matters of obligation, as are our instinctive feelings
of pleasure and pain. But this view unwarrantably isolates the intellect,
and ignores the fact that, in all moral subjects, the state of the affections
and will affects the judgment of the mind with regard to truth. In the
intellectual act the whole moral nature expresses itself. Since the tastes
determine the opinions, faith is a moral act, and men are responsible for
not believing.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 3:18-20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that believeth on him is not judged: he that believeth not hath been judged already, because he
hath not believed on the name of the only begotten Son of God. And this is the judgment, that the light is come into the
world, and men loved the darkness rather than the light; for their works were evil. For every one that doeth evil
hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, lest his works should be reproved</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:40</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye will not come to me,
that ye may have life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>16:8, 9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And he, when he is come, will convict the world in respect of sin ... of sin,
because they believe not on me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 2:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>she willed not to repent.</hi></q> Notice that the Revised Version
very frequently substitutes the voluntary and active terms <emph><q>disobedience</q></emph> and <emph><q>disobedient</q></emph>
for the <q><emph>unbelief</emph></q> and <q><emph>unbelieving</emph></q> of the Authorized Version,&mdash;as in <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 15:31</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb.
3:18; 4:6, 11; 11:31</hi>. See Park, Discourses, 45, 46.
</p>

<p>
Savages do not know that they are responsible for their physical appetites, or that
there is any right and wrong in matters of sense, until they come under the influence
of Christianity. In like manner, even men of science can declare that the intellectual
sphere has no part in man's probation, and that we are no more responsible for our
opinions and beliefs than we are for the color of our skin. But faith is not a merely
intellectual act,&mdash;the affections and will give it quality. There is no moral quality in
the belief that 2 + 2 = 4, because we can not help that belief. But in believing on Christ
there is moral quality, because there is the element of choice. Indeed it may be questioned,
whether, in every judgment upon moral things, there is not an act of will.
</p>

<p>
Hence on <hi rend='italic'>John 7:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If any man willeth to do his will, he shall know of the teaching, whether it is of God, or
whether I speak from myself</hi></q>&mdash;F. L. Patton calls attention to the two common errors: (1)
that obedience will certify doctrine,&mdash;which is untrue, because obedience is the result
of faith, not <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>; (2) that personal experience is the ultimate test of faith,&mdash;which
is untrue, because the Bible is the only rule of faith, and it is one thing to receive
truth through the feelings, but quite another to test truth by the feelings. The text
really means, that if any man is willing to do God's will, he shall know whether it be of
God; and the two lessons to be drawn are: (1) the gospel needs no additional evidence;
(2) the Holy Ghost is the hope of the world. On responsibility for opinions and beliefs,
see Mozley, on Blanco White, in Essays Philos. and Historical, 2:142; T. T. Smith, Hulsean
Lectures for 1839. Wilfrid Ward, The Wish to Believe, quotes Shakespeare: <q>Thy
wish was father, Harry, to that thought</q>; and Thomas Arnold: <q>They dared not
lightly believe what they so much wished to be true.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pascal: <q>Faith is an act of the will.</q> Emerson, Essay on Worship: <q>A man bears
beliefs as a tree bears apples. Man's religious faith is the expression of what he is.</q>
Bain: <q>In its essential character, belief is a phase of our active nature, otherwise
called the will.</q> Nash, Ethics and Revelation, 257&mdash;<q>Faith is the creative human
answer to the creative divine offer. It is not the passive acceptance of a divine favor....
By faith man, laying hold of the personality of God in Christ, becomes a true
person. And by the same faith he becomes, under God, a creator and founder of true
society.</q> Inge, Christian Mysticism, 52&mdash;<q>Faith begins with an experiment and ends
with an experience. But even the power to make the experiment is given from above.
Eternal life is not γνῶσις, but the state of acquiring knowledge&mdash;ἴνα γιγνώσκωσιν. It is
significant that John, who is so fond of the verb <q>to know,</q> never uses the substantive
γνῶσις.</q> Crane, Religion of To-morrow, 148&mdash;<q><q>I will not obey, because I do not yet
know</q>? But this is making the intellectual side the only side of faith, whereas the
most important side is the will-side. Let a man follow what he does believe, and he
shall be led on to larger faith. Faith is the reception of the personal influence of a
living Lord, and a corresponding action.</q>
</p>

<p>
William James, Will to Believe, 61&mdash;<q>This life is worth living, since it is what we
make it, from the moral point of view.... Often enough our faith beforehand in an
uncertified result is the only thing that makes the result come true.... If your heart
<pb n='842'/><anchor id='Pg842'/>
does not <emph>want</emph> a world of moral reality, your head will assuredly never make you believe
in one.... Freedom to believe covers only living options which the intellect cannot
by itself resolve.... We are not to put a stopper on our heart, and meantime act as
if religion were not true</q>; Psychology, 2:282, 321&mdash;<q>Belief is consent, willingness,
turning of our disposition. It is the mental state or function of cognizing reality. We
never disbelieve anything except for the reason that we believe something else which
contradicts the first thing. We give higher reality to whatever things we select and
emphasize and turn to with a will.... We need only in cold blood act as if the thing
in question were real, and keep acting as if it were real, and it will infallibly end by
growing into such a connection with our life that it will become real. Those to whom
God and duty are mere names, can make them much more than that, if they make a
little sacrifice to them every day.</q>
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson: <q>Campbellism makes intellectual belief to be saving faith. But saving
faith is consent of the heart as well as assent of the intellect. On the one hand
there is the intellectual element: faith is belief upon the ground of evidence; faith
without evidence is credulity. But on the other hand faith has an element of affection;
the element of love is always wrapped up in it. So Abraham's faith made Abraham
like God; for we always become like that which we trust.</q> Faith therefore is not
chronologically subsequent to regeneration, but is its accompaniment. As the soul's
appropriation of Christ and his salvation, it is not the result of an accomplished renewal,
but rather the medium through which that renewal is effected. Otherwise it would
follow that one who had not yet believed (<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, received Christ) might still be regenerate,
whereas the Scripture represents the privilege of sonship as granted only to
believers. See <hi rend='italic'>John 1:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But as many as received him, to them gave he the right to become children of
God, even to them that believe on his name: who were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God</hi></q>; also <hi rend='italic'>3:5, 6, 10-15</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 3:26</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 1:3</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 John 5:1</hi>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the object of saving faith is, in general, the whole truth of God,
so far as it is objectively revealed or made known to the soul; but, in particular,
the person and work of Jesus Christ, which constitutes the centre
and substance of God's revelation (Acts 17:18; 1 Cor. 1:23; Col. 1:27;
Rev. 19:10).
</p>

<p>
The patriarchs, though they had no knowledge of a personal Christ, were
saved by believing in God so far as God had revealed himself to them; and
whoever among the heathen are saved, must in like manner be saved by
casting themselves as helpless sinners upon God's plan of mercy, dimly
shadowed forth in nature and providence. But such faith, even among the
patriarchs and heathen, is implicitly a faith in Christ, and would become
explicit and conscious trust and submission, whenever Christ were made
known to them (Mat. 8:11, 12; John 10:16; Acts 4:12; 10:31, 34, 35,
44; 16:31).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 17:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he preached Jesus and the resurrection</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>we preach Christ crucified</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 1:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>this
mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory: whom we proclaim</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 19:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.</hi></q> Saving faith is not belief in a dogma, but personal
trust in a personal Christ. It is, therefore, possible to a child. Dorner: <q>The object of
faith is the Christian revelation&mdash;God in Christ.... Faith is union with objective
Christianity&mdash;appropriation of the real contents of Christianity.</q> Dr. Samuel Hopkins,
the great uncle, defined faith as <q>an understanding, cordial receiving of the
divine testimony concerning Jesus Christ and the way of salvation by him, in which
the heart accords and conforms to the gospel.</q> Dr. Mark Hopkins, the great nephew,
defined it as <q>confidence in a personal being.</q> Horace Bushnell: <q>Faith rests on a
person. Faith is that act by which one person, a sinner, commits himself to another
person, a Savior.</q> In <hi rend='italic'>John 11:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I am the resurrection and the life</hi></q>&mdash;Martha is led to substitute
belief in a person for belief in an abstract doctrine. Jesus is <q><emph>the resurrection</emph>,</q> because he
is <q><emph>the life</emph>.</q> All doctrine and all miracle is significant and important only because it is
the expression of the living Christ, the Revealer of God.
</p>

<p>
The object of faith is sometimes represented in the N. T., as being God the Father.
<hi rend='italic'>John 5:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that heareth my word, and believeth him that sent me, hath eternal life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 4:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to him that
worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is reckoned for righteousness.</hi></q> We can
<pb n='843'/><anchor id='Pg843'/>
explain these passages only when we remember that Christ is God <q><hi rend='italic'>manifested in the flesh</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:16</hi>), and that <q><hi rend='italic'>he that hath seen me hath seen the Father</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 14:9</hi>). Man may receive a
gift without knowing from whom it comes, or how much it has cost. So the heathen,
who casts himself as a sinner upon God's mercy, may receive salvation from the Crucified
One, without knowing who is the giver, or that the gift was purchased by agony
and blood. Denney, Studies in Theology, 154&mdash;<q>No N. T. writer ever <emph>remembered</emph> Christ.
They never thought of him as belonging to the past. Let us not preach about the <emph>historical</emph>
Christ, but rather, about the <emph>living</emph> Christ; nay, let us preach <emph>him</emph>, present and
omnipotent. Jesus could say: <q><hi rend='italic'>Whither I go, ye know the way</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 14:4</hi>); for they knew <emph>him</emph>,
and he was both the <emph>end</emph> and the <emph>way</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. Charles Hodge unduly restricts the operations of grace to the preaching of the
incarnate Christ: Syst. Theol., 2:648&mdash;<q>There is no faith where the gospel is not heard;
and where there is no faith, there is no salvation. This is indeed an awful doctrine.</q>
And yet, in 2:668, he says most inconsistently: <q>As God is everywhere present in the
material world, guiding its operations according to the laws of nature; so he is everywhere
present with the minds of men, as the Spirit of truth and goodness, operating on
them according to laws of their free moral agency, inclining them to good and restraining
them from evil.</q> This presence and revelation of God we hold to be through Christ,
the eternal Word, and so we interpret the prophecy of Caiaphas as referring to the work
of the personal Christ: <hi rend='italic'>John 11:51, 52</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he prophesied that Jesus should die for the nation; and not for the
nation only, but that he might also gather together into one the children of God that are scattered abroad.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Since Christ is the Word of God and the Truth of God, he may be received even by
those who have not heard of his manifestation in the flesh. A proud and self-righteous
morality is inconsistent with saving faith; but a humble and penitent reliance upon
God, as a Savior from sin and a guide of conduct, is an implicit faith in Christ; for such
reliance casts itself upon God, so far as God has revealed himself,&mdash;and the only
Revealer of God is Christ. We have, therefore, the hope that even among the heathen
there may be some, like Socrates, who, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit working
through the truth of nature and conscience, have found the way of life and salvation.
</p>

<p>
The number of such is so small as in no degree to weaken the claims of the missionary
enterprise upon us. But that there are such seems to be intimated in Scripture: <hi rend='italic'>Mat.
8:11, 12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>many shall come from the east and the west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the
kingdom of heaven: but the sons of the kingdom shall be cast forth into the outer darkness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 10:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And other
sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and they shall become
one flock, one shepherd</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 4:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And in none other is there salvation: for neither is there any other name under
heaven, that is given among men, wherein we must be saved</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>10:31, 34, 35, 44</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Cornelius, thy prayer is heard,
and thine alms are had in remembrance in the sight of God.... Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons:
but in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is acceptable to him.... While Peter yet spake
these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all them that heard the word</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>16:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou
shalt be saved, thou and thy house.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
And instances are found of apparently regenerated heathen; see in Godet on <hi rend='italic'>John 7:17</hi>,
note (vol. 2:277), the account of the so-called <q>Chinese hermit,</q> who accepted Christ,
saying: <q>This is the only Buddha whom men ought to worship!</q> Edwards, Life of
Brainard, 173-175, gives an account <q>of one who was a devout and zealous reformer, or
rather restorer, of what he supposed was the ancient religion of the Indians.</q> After
a period of distress, he says that God <q>comforted his heart and showed him what he
should do, and since that time he had known God and tried to serve him; and loved all
men, be they who they would, so as he never did before.</q> See art. by Dr. Lucius E.
Smith, in Bib. Sac., Oct. 1881:622-645, on the question: <q>Is salvation possible without
a knowledge of the gospel?</q> H. B. Smith, System, 323, note, rightly bases hope for the
heathen, not on morality, but on sacrifice.
</p>

<p>
A chief of the Camaroons in S. W. Africa, fishing with many of his tribe long before
the missionaries came, was overtaken by a storm, and while almost all the rest were
drowned, he and a few others escaped. He gathered his people together afterwards
and told the story of disaster. He said: <q>When the canoes upset and I found myself
battling with the waves, I thought: To whom shall I cry for help? I knew that the
god of the hills could not help me; I knew that the evil spirit would not help me. So
I cried to the Great Father, Lord, save me! At that moment my feet touched the
sand of the beach, and I was safe. Now let all my people honor the Great Father, and
let no man speak a word against him, for he can help us.</q> This chief afterwards used
every effort to prevent strife and bloodshed, and was remembered by those who came
after as a peace-maker. His son told this story to Alfred Saker, the missionary, saying
<pb n='844'/><anchor id='Pg844'/>
<q>Why did you not come sooner? My father longed to know what you have told us;
he thirsted for the knowledge of God.</q> Mr. Saker told this in England in 1879.
</p>

<p>
John Fiske appends to his book, The Idea of God, 168, 169, the following pathetic
words of a Kafir, named Sekese, in conversation with a French traveler, M. Arbrouseille,
on the subject of the Christian religion: <q>Your tidings,</q> said this uncultured
barbarian, <q>are what I want, and I was seeking before I knew you, as you shall hear
and judge for yourself. Twelve years ago I went to feed my flocks; the weather was
hazy. I sat down upon a rock, and asked myself sorrowful questions; yes, sorrowful,
because I was unable to answer them. Who has touched the stars with his hands&mdash;on
what pillars do they rest? I asked myself. The waters never weary, they know no
other law than to flow without ceasing from morning till night and from night till
morning; but where do they stop, and who makes them flow thus? The clouds also
come and go, and burst in water over the earth. Whence come they&mdash;who sends them?
The diviners certainly do not give us rain; for how could they do it? And why do I not
see them with my own eyes, when they go up to heaven to fetch it? I cannot see the
wind; but what is it? Who brings it, makes it blow and roar and terrify us? Do I
know how the corn sprouts? Yesterday there was not a blade in my field; to-day I
returned to my field and found some; who can have given to the earth the wisdom and
the power to produce it? Then I buried my head in both hands.</q>
</p>

<p>
On the question whether men are ever led to faith, without intercourse with living
Christians or preachers, see Life of Judson, by his son, 84. The British and Foreign
Bible Society publish a statement, made upon the authority of Sir Bartle Frere, that
he met with <q>an instance, which was carefully investigated, in which all the inhabitants
of a remote village in the Deccan had abjured idolatry and caste, removed from
their temples the idols which had been worshiped there time out of mind, and agreed to
profess a form of Christianity which they had deduced from the careful perusal of a
single Gospel and a few tracts.</q> Max Müller, Chips, 4:177-189, apparently proves that
Buddha is the original of St. Josaphat, who has a day assigned to him in the calendar
of both the Greek and the Roman churches. <q>Sancte Socrates, ora pro nobis.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Missionary Review of the World, July, 1896:519-523, tells the story of Adiri,
afterwards called John King, of Maripastoon in Dutch Guiana. The Holy Spirit
wrought in him mightily years before he heard of the missionaries. He was a coal-black
negro, a heathen and a fetish worshiper. He was convicted of sin and apparently converted
through dreams and visions. Heaven and hell were revealed to him. He was
sick unto death, and One appeared to him declaring himself to be the Mediator between
God and man, and telling him to go to the missionaries for instruction. He was persecuted,
but he won his tribe from heathenism and transformed them into a Christian
community.
</p>

<p>
S. W. Hamblen, missionary to China, tells of a very earnest and consistent believer
who lived at rather an obscure town of about 2800 people. The evangelist went to visit
him and found that he was a worthy example to those around him. He had become a
Christian before he had seen a single believer, by reading a Chinese New Testament.
Although till the evangelist went to his house he had never met a Baptist and did not
know that there were any Baptist churches in existence, yet by reading the New Testament
he had become not only a Christian but a strong Baptist in belief, so strong that
he could argue with the missionary on the subject of baptism.
</p>

<p>
The Rev. K. E. Malm, a pioneer Baptist preacher in Sweden, on a journey to the district
as far north as Gestrikland, met a woman from Lapland who was on her way to
Upsala in order to visit Dr. Fjellstedt and converse with him as to how she might
obtain peace with God and get rid of her anxiety concerning her sins. She said she had
traveled 60 (= 240 English) miles, and she had still far to go. Malm improved the
opportunity to speak to her concerning the crucified Christ, and she found peace in
believing on his atonement. She became so happy that she clapped her hands, and for
joy could not sleep that night. She said later: <q>Now I will return home and tell the
people what I have found.</q> This she did, and did not care to continue her journey to
Upsala, in order to get comfort from Dr. Fjellstedt.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That the ground of faith is the external word of promise. The
ground of assurance, on the other hand, is the inward witness of the Spirit
that we fulfil the conditions of the promise (Rom. 4:20, 21; 8:16; Eph.
1:13; 1 John 4:13; 5:10). This witness of the Spirit is not a new revelation
<pb n='845'/><anchor id='Pg845'/>
from God, but a strengthening of faith so that it becomes conscious
and indubitable.
</p>

<p>
True faith is possible without assurance of salvation. But if Alexander's
view were correct, that the object of saving faith is the proposition: <q>God,
for Christ's sake, now looks with reconciling love on me, a sinner,</q> no one
could believe, without being at the same time assured that he was a saved
person. Upon the true view, that the object of saving faith is not a proposition,
but a person, we can perceive not only the simplicity of faith, but
the possibility of faith even where the soul is destitute of assurance or of
joy. Hence those who already believe are urged to seek for assurance
(Heb. 6:11; 2 Peter 1:10).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 4:20, 21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>looking unto the promise of God, he wavered not through unbelief, but waxed strong through faith,
giving glory to God, and being fully assured that what he had promised, he was able also to perform</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>8:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The
Spirit himself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are children of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in whom, having also
believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 4:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>hereby we know that we abide in him, and
he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in him.</hi></q>
This assurance is not of the essence of faith, because believers are exhorted to attain to
it: <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 6:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And we desire that each one of you may show the same diligence unto the fulness of hope</hi> [marg.&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>full
assurance</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>even to the end</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 1:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Wherefore, brethren, give the more diligence to make your
calling and election sure.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Prov. 14:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>a good man shall be satisfied from himself.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
There is need to guard the doctrine of assurance from mysticism. The witness of
the Spirit is not a new and direct revelation from God. It is a strengthening of previously
existing faith until he who possesses this faith cannot any longer doubt that
he possesses it. It is a general rule that all our emotions, when they become exceedingly
strong, also become conscious. Instance affection between man and woman.
</p>

<p>
Edwards, Religious Affections, in Works, 3:83-91, says the witness of the Spirit is not
a new word or suggestion from God, but an enlightening and sanctifying influence, so
that the heart is drawn forth to embrace the truth already revealed, and to perceive
that it embraces it. <q>Bearing witness</q> is not in this case to declare and assert a thing
to be true, but to hold forth evidence from which a thing may be proved to be true:
God <q><hi rend='italic'>beareth witness ... by signs and wonders</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 2:4</hi>). So the <q>seal of the Spirit</q> is not
a voice or suggestion, but a work or effect of the Spirit, left as a divine mark upon the
soul, to be an evidence by which God's children may be known. Seals had engraved
upon them the image or name of the persons to whom they belonged. The <q>seal of
the Spirit,</q> the <q>earnest of the Spirit,</q> the <q>witness of the Spirit,</q> are all one thing.
The childlike spirit, given by the Holy Spirit, is the Holy Spirit's witness or evidence
in us.
</p>

<p>
See also illustration of faith and assurance, in C. S. Robinson's Short Studies for
S. S. Teachers, 179, 180. Faith should be distinguished not only from assurance, but also
from feeling or joy. Instance Abraham's faith when he went to sacrifice Isaac; and
Madame Guyon's faith, when God's face seemed hid from her. See, on the witness of
the Spirit, Short, Bampton Lectures for 1846; British and For. Evan. Rev., 1888:617-631.
For the view which confounds faith with assurance, see Alexander, Discourses on Faith,
63-118.
</p>

<p>
It is important to distinguish saving faith from assurance of faith, for the reason
that lack of assurance is taken by so many real Christians as evidence that they know
nothing of the grace of God. To use once more a well-worn illustration: It is getting
into the boat that saves us, and not our comfortable feelings about the boat. What
saves us is faith in <emph>Christ</emph>, not faith in <emph>our</emph> faith, or faith in <emph>the</emph> faith. The astronomer
does not turn his telescope to the reflection of the sun or moon in the water, when he
can turn it to the sun or moon itself. Why obscure our faith, when we can look to
Christ?
</p>

<p>
The faith in a distant Redeemer was the faith of Christian, in Bunyan's Pilgrim's
Progress. Only at the end of his journey does Christian have Christ's presence. This
representation rests upon a wrong conception of faith as laying hold of a promise or a
doctrine, rather than as laying hold of the living and present Christ. The old Scotch
woman's direction to the inquirer to <q>grip the promise</q> is not so good as the direction
to <q>grip Christ.</q> Sir Francis Drake, the great English sailor, had for his crest an
<pb n='846'/><anchor id='Pg846'/>
anchor with a cable running up into the sky. A poor boy, taught in a mission school in
Ireland, when asked what was meant by saving faith, replied: <q>It is grasping God with
the heart.</q>
</p>

<p>
The view of Charles Hodge, like that of Alexander, puts doctrine before Christ, and
makes the formal principle, the supremacy of Scripture, superior to the material principle,
justification by faith. The Shorter Catechism is better: <q>Faith in Christ is a saving
grace, whereby we receive and rest <emph>on him alone</emph> for salvation, as he is offered to us
in the gospel.</q> If this relation of faith to the personal Christ had been kept in mind,
much religious despondency might have been avoided. Murphy, Natural Selection and
Spiritual Freedom, 30, 31, tells us that Frances Ridley Havergal could never fix the
date of her conversion. From the age of six to that of fourteen she suffered from religious
fears, and did not venture to call herself a Christian. It was the result of confounding
<emph>being</emph> at peace with God and being <emph>conscious</emph> of that peace. So the mother of
Frederick Denison Maurice, an admirable and deeply religious woman, endured long
and deep mental suffering from doubts as to her personal election.
</p>

<p>
There is a witness of the Spirit, with some sinners, that they are <emph>not</emph> children of God,
and this witness is through the truth, though the sinner does not know that it is the
Spirit who reveals it to him. We call this work of the Spirit conviction of sin. The
witness of the Spirit that we are children of God, and the assurance of faith of which
Scripture speaks, are one and the same thing, the former designation only emphasizing
the source from which the assurance springs. False assurance is destitute of humility,
but true assurance is so absorbed in Christ that self is forgotten. Self-consciousness,
and desire to display one's faith, are not marks of true assurance. When we say: <q>That
man has a great deal of assurance,</q> we have in mind the false and self-centered assurance
of the hypocrite or the self-deceiver.
</p>

<p>
Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 231&mdash;<q>It has been said that any one who can read Edwards's
Religious Affections, and still believe in his own conversion, may well have the highest
assurance of its reality. But how few there were in Edwards's time who gained the
assurance, may be inferred from the circumstance that Dr. Hopkins and Dr. Emmons,
disciples of Edwards and religious leaders in New England, remained to the last uncertain
of their conversion.</q> He can attribute this only to the semi-deistic spirit of the
time, with its distant God and imperfect apprehension of the omnipresence and omnipotence
of Christ. Nothing so clearly marks the practical progress of Christianity as
the growing faith in Jesus, the only Revealer of God in nature and history as well as
in the heart of the believer. As never before, faith comes directly to Christ, abides in
him, and finds his promise true: <q><hi rend='italic'>Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:20</hi>).
<q>Nothing before, nothing behind; The steps of faith Fall on the seeming void and find
The Rock beneath.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) That faith necessarily leads to good works, since it embraces the
whole truth of God so far as made known, and appropriates Christ, not only
as an external Savior, but as an internal sanctifying power (Heb. 7:15, 16;
Gal. 5:6).
</p>

<p>
Good works are the proper evidence of faith. The faith which does not
lead men to act upon the commands and promises of Christ, or, in other
words, does not lead to obedience, is called in Scripture a <q>dead,</q> that is,
an unreal, faith. Such faith is not saving, since it lacks the voluntary element&mdash;actual
appropriation of Christ (James 2:14-26).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 7:15, 16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>another priest, who hath been made, not after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power
of an endless life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 5:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision; but
faith working through love</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>James 2:14, 26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>What doth it profit, my brethren, if a man say he hath faith, but
have not works? Can that faith save him?... For as the body apart from the spirit is dead, even so faith apart
from works is dead.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
The best evidence that I believe a man's word is that I act upon it. Instance the
bank-cashier's assurance to me that a sum of money is deposited with him to my
account. If I am a millionaire, the communication may cause me no special joy. My
faith in the cashier's word is tested by my going, or not going, for the money. So my
faith in Christ is evidenced by my acting upon his commands and promises. We may
illustrate also by the lifting of the trolley to the wire, and the resulting light and heat
and motion to the car that before stood dark and cold and motionless upon the track.
<pb n='847'/><anchor id='Pg847'/>
Salvation by works is like getting to one's destination by pushing the car. True faith
depends upon God for energy, but it results in activity of all our powers. <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 3:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We
reckon therefore that a man is justified by faith apart from the works of the law.</hi></q> We are saved only by
faith, yet this faith will be sure to bring forth good works; see <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 5:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>faith working
through love.</hi></q> Dead faith might be illustrated by Abraham Lincoln's Mississippi steamboat,
whose whistle was so big that, when it sounded, the boat stopped. Confession
exhausts the energy, so that none is left for action.
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, The First Thing in the World, or The Primacy of Faith: <q>David Brainard
speaks with a kind of suppressed astonishment of what he observed among the
degraded North American Indians; how, preaching to them the good news of salvation
through the atonement of Christ and persuading them to accept it by faith, and then
hastening on in his rapid missionary tours, he found, on returning upon his track a
year or two later, that the fruits of righteousness and sobriety and virtue and brotherly
love were everywhere visible, though it had been possible to impart to them only
the slightest moral or ethical teaching.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) That faith, as characteristically the inward act of reception, is not to
be confounded with love or obedience, its fruit.
</p>

<p>
Faith is, in the Scriptures, called a work, only in the sense that man's
active powers are engaged in it. It is a work which God requires, yet
which God enables man to perform (John 6:29&mdash;ἔργον τοῦ Θεοῦ. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Rom.
1:17&mdash;δικαιοσύνη Θεοῦ). As the gift of God and as the mere taking of undeserved
mercy, it is expressly excluded from the category of works upon the
basis of which man may claim salvation (Rom. 3:28; 4:4, 5, 16). It is
not the act of the full soul bestowing, but the act of an empty soul receiving.
Although this reception is prompted by a drawing of heart toward
God inwrought by the Holy Spirit, this drawing of heart is not yet a conscious
and developed love: such love is the result of faith (Gal. 5:6).
What precedes faith is an unconscious and undeveloped tendency or disposition
toward God. Conscious and developed affection toward God, or love
proper, must always follow faith and be the product of faith. So, too,
obedience can be rendered only after faith has laid hold of Christ, and with
him has obtained the spirit of obedience (Rom. 1:5&mdash;ὑπακοὴν πίστεως =
<q>obedience resulting from faith</q>). Hence faith is not the procuring cause
of salvation, but is only the instrumental cause. The procuring cause is
the Christ, whom faith embraces.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 6:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 1:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For therein
is revealed a righteousness of God from faith unto faith: as it is written, But the righteous shall live by faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom.
3:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We reckon therefore that a man is justified by faith apart from the works of the law</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>4:4, 5, 16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now
to him that worketh, the reward is not reckoned as of grace, but as of debt. But to him that worketh not, but believeth
on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is reckoned for righteousness.... For this cause it is of faith, that it may
be according to grace</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 5:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision;
but faith working through love</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 1:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>through whom we received grace and apostleship, unto obedience of
faith among all the nations.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Faith stands as an intermediate factor between the unconscious and undeveloped
tendency or disposition toward God inwrought in the soul by God's regenerating act,
on the one hand, and the conscious and developed affection toward God which is one
of the fruits and evidences of conversion, on the other. Illustrate by the motherly
instinct shown in a little girl's care for her doll,&mdash;a motherly instinct which becomes a
developed mother's love, only when a child of her own is born. This new love of the
Christian is an activity of his own soul, and yet it is a <q><hi rend='italic'>fruit of the Spirit</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 5:22</hi>). To
attribute it wholly to himself would be like calling the walking and leaping of the lame
man (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 3:8</hi>) merely a healthy activity of his own. For illustration of the priority of
faith to love, see Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:533, note; on the relation of faith to love, see
Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, 1:116, 117.
</p>

<p>
The logical order is therefore: 1. Unconscious and undeveloped love; 2. Faith in
Christ and his truth; 3. Conscious and developed love; 4. Assurance of faith. Faith
<pb n='848'/><anchor id='Pg848'/>
and love act and react upon one another. Each advance in the one leads to a corresponding
advance in the other. But the source of all is in God. God loves, and therefore
he gives love to us as well as receives love from us. The unconscious and
undeveloped love which he imparts in regeneration is the root of all Christian faith.
The Roman Catholic is right in affirming the priority of love to faith, if he means by
love only this unconscious and undeveloped affection. But the Protestant is also right
in affirming the priority of faith to love, if he means by love a conscious and developed
affection. Stevens, Johannine Theology, 368&mdash;<q>Faith is not a mere passive receptivity.
As the acceptance of a divine life, it involves the possession of a new moral energy.
Faith works by love. In faith a new life-force is received, and new life-powers stir
within the Christian man.</q>
</p>

<p>
We must not confound repentance with fruits meet for repentance, nor faith with
fruits meet for faith. A. J. Gordon, The First Thing in the World: <q>Love is the greatest
thing in the world, but faith is the first. The tree is greater than the root, but let
it not boast: <q><hi rend='italic'>if thou gloriest, it is not thou that bearest the root, but the root thee</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 11:18</hi>). Love has
no power to branch out and bear fruit, except as, through faith, it is rooted in Christ
and draws nourishment from him. <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who by the power of God are guarded through faith unto
a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 13:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>now abideth faith, hope, love</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:19-25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>draw
near ... in fulness of faith ... hold fast the confession of our hope ... provoke unto love and good
works</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:1-5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>justified by faith ... rejoice in hope ... love of God hath been shed abroad in our
hearts</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 1:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>work of faith and labor of love and patience of hope.</hi></q> Faith is the actinic ray, hope
the luminiferous ray, love the calorific ray. But faith contains the principle of the
divine likeness, as the life of the parent given to the child contains the principle of likeness
to the father, and will insure moral and physical resemblance in due time.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 112&mdash;<q><q><hi rend='italic'>The love of the Spirit</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 15:30</hi>) is the love of
the Spirit of Christ, and it is given us for overcoming the world. The divine life is the
source of the divine love. Therefore the love of God is <q><hi rend='italic'>shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Spirit who is given unto us</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:5</hi>). Because we are by nature so wholly without heavenly
affection, God, through the indwelling Spirit, gives us his own love with which to love
himself.</q> A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 286, 287, points out that in <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the love
of Christ constraineth us</hi></q>&mdash;the love of Christ is <q>not our love to Christ, for that is a very
weak and uncertain thing; nor even Christ's love to us, for that is still something
external to us. Each of these leaves a separation between Christ and us, and fails to
act as a moving power within.... Not simply our love to Christ, nor simply Christ's
love to us, but rather Christ's love <emph>in</emph> us, is the love that constrains. This is the thought
of the apostle.</q> The first fruit of this love, in its still unconscious and undeveloped
state, is faith.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) That faith is susceptible of increase.
</p>

<p>
This is evident, whether we consider it from the human or from the divine
side. As an act of man, it has an intellectual, an emotional, and a voluntary
element, each of which is capable of growth. As a work of God in the soul
of man, it can receive, through the presentation of the truth and the quickening
agency of the Holy Spirit, continually new accessions of knowledge,
sensibility, and active energy. Such increase of faith, therefore, we are to
seek, both by resolute exercise of our own powers, and above all, by direct
application to the source of faith in God (Luke 17:5).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 17:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith.</hi></q> The adult Christian has more
faith than he had when a child,&mdash;evidently there has been increase. <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:8, 9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For to
one is given through the Spirit the word of wisdom ... to another faith, in the same Spirit.</hi></q> In this latter
passage, it seems to be intimated that for special exigencies the Holy Spirit gives to his
servants special faith, so that they are enabled to lay hold of the general promise of
God and make special application of it. <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:26, 27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Spirit also helpeth our infirmity ...
maketh intercession for us ... maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 5:14, 15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And
this is the boldness which we have toward him, that, if we ask anything according to his will, he heareth us: and
if we know that he heareth us whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him.</hi></q>
Only when we begin to believe, do we appreciate our lack of faith, and the great need
of its increase. The little beginning of light makes known the greatness of the surrounding
darkness. <hi rend='italic'>Mark 9:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I believe; help thou mine unbelief</hi></q>&mdash;was the utterance of one
who recognized both the need of faith and the true source of supply.
</p>

<pb n='849'/><anchor id='Pg849'/>

<p>
On the general subject of Faith, see Köstlin, Die Lehre von dem Glauben, 13-85, 301-341,
and in Jahrbuch f. d. Theol., 4:177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Romaine on Faith, 9-89; Bishop of Ossory,
Nature and Effects of Faith, 1-40; Venn, Characteristics of Belief, Introduction;
Nitzsch, System of Christ. Doct., 294.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Justification.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Definition of Justification.</head>

<p>
By justification we mean that judicial act of God by which, on account of
Christ, to whom the sinner is united by faith, he declares that sinner to be
no longer exposed to the penalty of the law, but to be restored to his favor.
Or, to give an alternative definition from which all metaphor is excluded:
Justification is the reversal of God's attitude toward the sinner, because of
the sinner's new relation to Christ. God did condemn; he now acquits.
He did repel; he now admits to favor.
</p>

<p>
Justification, as thus defined, is therefore a declarative act, as distinguished
from an efficient act; an act of God external to the sinner, as distinguished
from an act within the sinner's nature and changing that nature;
a judicial act, as distinguished from a sovereign act; an act based upon and
logically presupposing the sinner's union with Christ, as distinguished from
an act which causes and is followed by that union with Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The word <q>declarative</q> does not imply a <q>spoken</q> word on God's part,&mdash;much less
that the sinner hears God speak. That justification is sovereign, is held by Arminians,
and by those who advocate a governmental theory of the atonement. On any such
theory, justification must be sovereign; since Christ bore, not the penalty of the law,
but a substituted suffering which God graciously and sovereignly accepts in place of
our suffering and obedience.
</p>

<p>
Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1100, wrote a tract for the consolation of the
dying, who were alarmed on account of sin. The following is an extract from it:
<q><emph>Question</emph>. Dost thou believe that the Lord Jesus died for thee? <emph>Answer.</emph> I believe it.
<emph>Qu.</emph> Dost thou thank him for his passion and death? <emph>Ans.</emph> I do thank him. <emph>Qu.</emph> Dost
thou believe that thou canst not be saved except by his death? <emph>Ans.</emph> I believe it.</q>
And then Anselm addresses the dying man: <q>Come then, while life remaineth in thee;
in his death alone place thy whole trust; in naught else place any trust; to his death
commit thyself wholly; with this alone cover thyself wholly; and if the Lord thy God
will to judge thee, say, <q>Lord, between thy judgment and me I present the death of our
Lord Jesus Christ; no otherwise can I contend with thee.</q> And if he shall say that thou
art a sinner, say thou: <q>Lord, I interpose the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between
my sins and thee.</q> If he say that thou hast deserved condemnation, say: <q>Lord, I set
the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between my evil deserts and thee, and his merits I
offer for those which I ought to have and have not.</q> If he say that he is wroth with
thee, say: <q>Lord, I oppose the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between thy wrath and
me.</q> And when thou hast completed this, say again: <q>Lord, I set the death of our Lord
Jesus Christ between thee and me.</q></q> See Anselm, Opera (Migne), 1:686, 687. The
above quotation gives us reason to believe that the New Testament doctrine of justification
by faith was implicitly, if not explicitly, held by many pious souls through all
the ages of papal darkness.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Proof of the Doctrine of Justification.</head>

<p>
A. Scripture proofs of the doctrine as a whole are the following:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 1:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>a righteousness of God from faith unto faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:24-30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>being justified freely by his grace through
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus ... the justifier of him that hath faith in Jesus.... We reckon therefore
that a man is justified by faith apart from the works of the law ... justify the circumcision by faith, and the uncircumsion
through faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 3:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now that no man is justified by the law before God, is evident: for, The righteous
shall live by faith; and the law is not of faith; but, He that doeth them shall live in them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in
whom we have our redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace</hi></q>;
<pb n='850'/><anchor id='Pg850'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 11:4, 7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, through which he had witness borne
to him that he was righteous.... By faith Noah ... moved with godly fear, prepared an ark ... became heir
of the righteousness which is according to faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 15:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And he believed in Jehovah; and he reckoned it to
him for righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Is. 7:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>28:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that
believeth shall not be in haste</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Hab. 2:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the righteous shall live by his faith.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 85:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He will speak peace unto his people.</hi></q> God's great word of pardon includes all else.
Peace with him implies all the covenant privileges resulting therefrom. <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 3:21-23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>all
things are yours,</hi></q> because <q><hi rend='italic'>ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's</hi>.</q> This is not salvation by law,
nor by ideals, nor by effort, nor by character; although obedience to law, and a loftier
ideal, and unremitting effort, and a pure character, are consequences of justification.
Justification is the change in God's attitude toward the sinner which makes all these
consequences possible. The only condition of justification is the sinner's faith in Jesus,
which merges the life of the sinner in the life of Christ. Paul expresses the truth in
<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 2:16, 20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ, even we
believed on Christ Jesus, that we might be justified by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the law ... I have
been crucified with Christ; and it is no longer I that live, but Christ liveth in me: and that life which I now live in the
flesh I live in faith, the faith which is in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself up for me.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
With these observations and qualifications we may assent to much that is said by
Whiton, Divine Satisfaction, 64, who distinguishes between forgiveness and remission:
<q rend='pre'>Forgiveness is the righting of disturbed personal relations. Remission is removal of
the consequences which in the natural order of things have resulted from our fault.
God forgives all that is strictly personal, but remits nothing that is strictly natural in
sin. He imparts to the sinner the power to bear his burden and work off his debt of
consequences. Forgiveness is not remission. It is introductory to remission, just as
conversion is not salvation, but introductory to salvation. The prodigal was received
by his father, but he could not recover his lost patrimony. He could, however, have
been led by penitence to work so hard that he earned more than he had lost.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Here is an element in justification which Protestantism has ignored, and which
Romanism has tried to retain. Debts must be paid to the uttermost farthing. The
scars of past sins must remain forever. Forgiveness converts the persistent energy of
past sin from a destructive to a constructive power. There is a transformation of
energy into a new form. Genuine repentance spurs us up to do what we can to make
up for time lost and for wrong done. The sinner is clothed anew with moral power.
We are all to be judged by our works. That Paul had been a blasphemer was ever
stimulating him to Christian endeavor. The faith which receives Christ is a peculiar
<emph>spirit</emph>, a certain moral activity of love and obedience. It is not mere reliance on what
Christ was and did, but active endeavor to become and to do like him. Human justice
takes hold of <emph>deeds</emph>; divine righteousness deals with <emph>character</emph>. Justification by faith
is justification by spirit and inward principle, apart from the merit of works or performances,
but never without these. God's charity takes the will for the deed. This
is not justification by outward conduct, as the Judaizers thought, but by the godly
spirit.</q> If this new spirit be the Spirit of Christ to whom faith has united the soul, we
can accept the statement. There is danger however of conceiving this spirit as purely
man's own, and justification as not external to the sinner nor as the work of God,
but as the mere name for a subjective process by which man justifies himself.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Scripture use of the special words translated <q>justify</q> and <q>justification</q>
in the Septuagint and in the New Testament.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) δικαιόω&mdash;uniformly, or with only a single exception, signifies, not to
make righteous, but to declare just, or free from guilt and exposure to punishment.
The only O. T. passage where this meaning is questionable is
Dan. 12:3. But even here the proper translation is, in all probability, not
<q>they that turn many to righteousness,</q> but <q>they that justify many,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>,
cause many to be justified. For the Hiphil force of the verb, see Girdlestone,
O. T. Syn., 257, 258, and Delitzsch on Is. 53:11; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> James 5:19, 20.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
O. T. texts: <hi rend='italic'>Ex. 23:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I will not justify the wicked</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Deut. 25:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they</hi> [the judges] <hi rend='italic'>shall justify the
righteous, and condemn the wicked</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Job 27:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Far be it from me that I should justify you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 143:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in thy
sight no man living is righteous</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Prov. 17:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the righteous,
Both of them alike are an abomination to Jehovah</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Is. 5:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that justify the wicked for a bribe, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>50:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He is near that justifieth me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>53:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>by the knowledge of
<pb n='851'/><anchor id='Pg851'/>
himself shall my righteous servant justify many; and he shall bear their iniquities</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Dan. 12:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and they that turn
many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever</hi></q> (<q>they that justify many,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, cause many to
be justified); <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>James 5:19, 20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>My brethren, if any among you err from the truth, and one convert him;
let him know, that he who converteth a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall cover a
multitude of sins.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
The Christian minister absolves from sin, only as he marries a couple: he does not
join them,&mdash;he only declares them joined. So he declares men forgiven, if they have
complied with the appointed divine conditions. Marriage may be invalid where these
conditions are lacking, but the minister's absolution is of no account where there is no
repentance of sin and faith in Christ; see G. D. Boardman, The Church, 178. We are
ever to remember that the term justification is a forensic term which presents the
change of God's attitude toward the sinner in a pictorial way derived from the procedure
of earthly tribunals. The fact is larger and more vital than the figure used to
describe it.
</p>

<p>
McConnell, Evolution of Immortality, 134, 135&mdash;<q>Christ's terms are biological; those
of many theologians are legal. It may be ages before we recover from the misfortune
of having had the truth of Christ interpreted and fixed by jurists and logicians, instead
of by naturalists and men of science. It is much as though the rationale of the circulation
of the blood had been wrought out by Sir Matthew Hale, or the germ theory of
disease interpreted by Blackstone, or the doctrine of evolution formulated by a legislative
council.... The Christ is intimately and vitally concerned with the eternal life
of men, but the question involved is of their living or perishing, not of a system of judicial
rewards and penalties.</q> We must remember however that even biology gives us
only one side of the truth. The forensic conception of justification furnishes its complement
and has its rights also. The Scriptures represent both sides of the truth. Paul
gives us the judicial aspect, John the vital aspect, of justification.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In Rom. 6:7&mdash;ὁ γὰρ ἀποθανὼν δεδικαίωται ἀπὸ τῆς ἁμαρτίας = <q>he that once
died with Christ was acquitted from the service of sin considered as a penality.</q>
In 1 Cor. 4:4&mdash;οὐδὲν γὰρ ἐμαυτῷ σύνοιδα. ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐν τούτῳ δεδικαίωμαι
= <q>I am conscious of no fault, but that does not in itself make certain God's
acquittal as respects this particular charge.</q> The usage of the epistle of
James does not contradict this; the doctrine of James is that we are justified
only by such faith as makes us faithful and brings forth good works.
<q>He uses the word exclusively in a judicial sense; he combats a mistaken
view of πίστις, not a mistaken view of δικαιόω</q>; see James 2:21, 23, 24, and
Cremer, N. T. Lexicon, Eng. trans., 182, 183. The only N. T. passage
where this meaning is questionable is Rev. 22:11; but here Alford, with
א, A and B, reads δικαιοσύνην ποιησάτω.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
N. T. texts: <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 12:37</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 7:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And all the people ... justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>10:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But he,
desiring to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbor?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>16:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Ye are they that justify yourselves in
the sight of men; but God knoweth your hearts</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>18:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>This man went down to his house justified rather than the
other</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>13</hi> (lit.) <q><hi rend='italic'>God, be thou propitiated toward me the sinner</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 4:6-8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Even as David also pronounceth
blessing upon the man, unto whom God reckoneth righteousness apart from works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven, And whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not reckon sin</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 32:1,
2</hi>,&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, Whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom Jehovah
imputeth not iniquity, And in whose spirit there is no guile.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:18, 19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>So then as through one trespass the judgment came unto all men to condemnation; even so through
one act of righteousness the free gift came unto all men to justification of life. For as through the one man's disobedience
the many were made sinners, even so through the obedience of the one shall the many be made righteous</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>8:33, 34</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Who
shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth; who is he that condemneth?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:19,
21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not reckoning unto them their trespasses.... Him
who knew no sin he made to be sin on our behalf; that we might become the righteousness of God</hi> [God's justified
persons] <hi rend='italic'>in him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that hath died is justified from sin</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 4:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For I know nothing
against myself; yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judgeth me is the Lord</hi></q> (on this last text, see
Expositor's Greek Testament, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>James 2:21, 23, 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Was not Abraham our father justified by works, in that he offered up Isaac his son upon the
altar?... Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned unto him for righteousness.... Ye see that by works
<pb n='852'/><anchor id='Pg852'/>
a man is justified, and not only by faith.</hi></q> James is denouncing a dead faith, while Paul is speaking
of the necessity of a living faith; or, rather, James is describing the nature of
faith, while Paul is describing the instrument of justification. <q>They are like two men
beset by a couple of robbers. Back to back each strikes out against the robber opposite
him,&mdash;each having a different enemy in his eye</q> (Wm. M. Taylor). Neander on
<hi rend='italic'>James 2:14-26</hi>&mdash;<q>James is denouncing mere adhesion to an external law, trust in intellectual
possession of it. With him, law means an inward principle of life. Paul, contrasting
law as he does with faith, commonly means by law mere external divine requisition....
James does not deny salvation to him who <emph>has</emph> faith, but only to him who falsely
<emph>professes</emph> to have. When he says that <q><hi rend='italic'>by works a man is justified</hi>,</q> he takes into account the
outward manifestation only, speaks from the point of view of human consciousness.
In works only does faith show itself as genuine and complete.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 22:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that is
righteous, let him do righteousness still</hi></q>&mdash;not, as the A. V. seemed to imply, <q>he that is just, let
him be justified still</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, made subjectively holy.
</p>

<p>
Christ is the great Physician. The physician says: <q>If you wish to be cured, you
must trust me.</q> The patient replies: <q>I do trust you fully.</q> But the physician continues:
<q>If you wish to be cured, you must take my medicines and do as I direct.</q> The
patient objects: <q>But I thought I was to be cured by trust in you. Why lay such stress
on what I do?</q> The physician answers: <q>You must show your trust in me by your
action. Trust in me, without action in proof of trust, amounts to nothing</q> (S. S.
Times). Doing without a physician is death; hence Paul says works cannot save. Trust
in the physician implies obedience; hence James says faith without works is dead.
Crane, Religion of To-morrow, 152-155&mdash;<q>Paul insists on apple-tree righteousness, and
warns us against Christmas-tree righteousness.</q> Sagebeer, The Bible in Court, 77,78&mdash;<q>By
works, Paul means works of law; James means by works, works of faith.</q> Hovey,
in The Watchman, Aug. 27, 1891&mdash;<q>A difference of emphasis, occasioned chiefly by the
different religious perils to which readers were at the time exposed.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) δικαίωσις&mdash;is the act, in process, of declaring a man just,&mdash;that is,
acquitted from guilt and restored to the divine favor (Rom. 4:25; 5:18).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 4:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who was delivered up for our trespasses, and was raised for our justification</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>unto all
men to justification of life.</hi></q> Griffith-Jones, Ascent through Christ, 367, 368&mdash;<q>Raised for our
justification</q> = Christ's death made our justification possible, but it did not consummate
it. Through his rising from the dead he was able to come into that relationship
to the believer which restores the lost or interrupted sonship. In the church the fact
of the resurrection is perpetuated, and the idea of the resurrection is realized.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) δικαίωμα&mdash;is the act, as already accomplished, of declaring a man
just,&mdash;that is, no longer exposed to penalty, but restored to God's favor
(Rom. 5:16, 18; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 1 Tim. 3:16). Hence, in other connections, δικαίωμα
has the meaning of statute, legal decision, act of justice (Luke 1:6; Rom.
2:26; Heb. 9:1).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:16, 18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>of many trespasses unto justification ... through one act of righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>justified
in the spirit.</hi></q> The distinction between δικαίωσις and δικαίωμα may be illustrated by
the distinction between poesy and poem,&mdash;the former denoting something in process,
an ever-working spirit; the latter denoting something fully accomplished, a completed
work. Hence δικαίωμα is used in <hi rend='italic'>Luke 1:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ordinances of the Lord</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 2:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ordinances of the
law</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 9:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ordinances of divine service.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) δικαιοσύνη&mdash;is the state of one justified, or declared just (Rom. 8:10;
1 Cor. 1:30). In Rom. 10:3, Paul inveighs against τὴν ἰδίαν δικαιοσύνην
as insufficient and false, and in its place would put τὴν τοῦ Θεοῦ δικαιοσύνην,&mdash;that
is, a δικαιοσύνη which God not only requires, but provides; which is not
only acceptable to God, but proceeds from God, and is appropriated by
faith,&mdash;hence called δικαιοσύνη πίστεως or ἐκ πίστεως. <q>The primary signification
of the word, in Paul's writings, is therefore that state of the believer
which is called forth by God's act of acquittal,&mdash;the state of the believer as
justified,</q> that is, freed from punishment and restored to the divine favor.
</p>

<pb n='853'/><anchor id='Pg853'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the spirit is life because of righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Christ Jesus, who was made unto us
... righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 10:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>being ignorant of God's righteousness, and seeking to establish their own, they
did not subject themselves to the righteousness of God.</hi></q> Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:542&mdash;<q>The <q><emph>righteousness
of God</emph></q> is the active and passive obedience of incarnate God.</q> See, on δικαιοσύνη, Cremer,
N. T. Lexicon, Eng. trans., 174; Meyer on Romans, trans., 68-70&mdash;<q>δικαιοσύνη Θεοῦ (gen.
of origin, emanation from) = rightness which proceeds from God&mdash;the relation of being
right into which man is put by God (by an act of God declaring him righteous).</q>
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 304&mdash;<q>When Paul addressed those who trusted
in their own righteousness, he presented salvation as attainable only through faith in
another; when he addressed Gentiles who were conscious of their need of a helper, the
forensic imagery is not employed. Scarce a trace of it appears in his discourses as
recorded in the Acts, and it is noticeably absent from all the epistles except the
Romans and the Galatians.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Since this state of acquittal is accompanied by changes in the character
and conduct, δικαιοσύνη comes to mean, secondarily, the moral condition of
the believer as resulting from this acquittal and inseparably connected with
it (Rom. 14:17; 2 Cor. 5:21). This righteousness arising from justification
becomes a principle of action (Mat. 3:15; Acts 10:35; Rom. 6:13,
18). The term, however, never loses its implication of a justifying act
upon which this principle of action is based.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 14:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy
Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that we might become the righteousness of God in him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Suffer it now: for
thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 10:35</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh
righteousness, is acceptable to him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>present yourselves unto God, as alive from the dead, and your
members as instruments of righteousness unto God.</hi></q> Meyer on <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 3:23</hi>&mdash;<q>Every mode of conception
which refers redemption and the forgiveness of sins, not to a real atonement
through the death of Christ, but subjectively to the dying and reviving with him guaranteed
and produced by that death (Schleiermacher, Nitzsch, Hofmann), is opposed
to the N. T.,&mdash;a mixing up of justification and sanctification.</q>
</p>

<p>
On these Scripture terms, see Bp. of Ossory, Nature and Effects of Faith, 436-496;
Lange, Com., on <hi rend='italic'>Romans 3:24</hi>; Buchanan on Justification, 226-249. <hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Moehler, Symbolism,
102&mdash;<q>The forgiveness of sins ... is undoubtedly a remission of the guilt and
the punishment which Christ hath taken and borne upon himself; but it is <emph>likewise</emph> the
transfusion of his Spirit into us</q>; Newman, Lectures on Justification, 68-143; Knox,
Remains; N. W. Taylor, Revealed Theology, 310-372.
</p>

<p>
It is a great mistake in method to derive the meaning of δίκαιος from that of δικαιοσύνη,
and not <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>. Wm. Arnold Stevens, in Am. Jour. Theology, April, 1897&mdash;<q>δικαιοσύνη,
righteousness, in all its meanings, whether ethical or forensic, has back
of it the idea of <emph>law</emph>; also the idea of <emph>violated</emph> law; it derives its forensic sense from the
verb δικαιόω and its cognate noun δικαίωσις; δικαιοσύνη therefore is legal acceptableness,
<hi rend='italic'>the status before the law of a pardoned sinner</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Denney, in Expos. Gk. Test., 2:565&mdash;<q>In truth, <q>sin,</q> <q>the law,</q> <q>the curse of the
law,</q> <q>death,</q> are names for something which belongs not to the Jewish but to the
human conscience; and it is only because this is so that the gospel of Paul is also a
gospel for us. Before Christ came and redeemed the world, all men were at bottom on
the same footing: Pharisaism, legalism, moralism, or whatever it is called, is in the
last resort the attempt to be good without God, to achieve a righteousness of our own,
without an initial all-inclusive immeasurable debt to him; in other words, without
submitting, as sinful men must submit, to be justified by faith apart from works of
our own, and to find in that justification, and in that only, the spring and impulse of
all good.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is worthy of special observation that, in the passages cited above, the
terms <q>justify</q> and <q>justification</q> are contrasted, not with the process of
depraving or corrupting, but with the outward act of condemning; and that
the expressions used to explain and illustrate them are all derived, not from
the inward operation of purifying the soul or infusing into it righteousness,
but from the procedure of courts in their judgments, or of offended persons
in their forgiveness of offenders. We conclude that these terms, wherever
<pb n='854'/><anchor id='Pg854'/>
they have reference to the sinner's relation to God, signify a declarative and
judicial act of God, external to the sinner, and not an efficient and sovereign
act of God changing the sinner's nature and making him subjectively
righteous.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In the Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent, session 6, chap. 9 is devoted to the
refutation of the <q>inanis hæreticorum fiducia</q>; and Canon 12 of the session anathematizes
those who say: <q>fidem justificantem nihil aliud esse quam fiduciam divinæ
misericordiæ, peccata remittentis propter Christum</q>; or that <q>justifying faith is
nothing but trust in the divine mercy which pardons sins for Christ's sake.</q> The
Roman Catholic doctrine on the contrary maintains that the ground of justification is
not simply the faith by which the sinner appropriates Christ and his atoning work, but
is also the new love and good works wrought within him by Christ's Spirit. This introduces
a subjective element which is foreign to the Scripture doctrine of justification.
</p>

<p>
Dr. E. G. Robinson taught that justification consists of three elements: 1. Acquittal;
2. Restoration to favor; 3. Infusion of righteousness. In this he accepted a fundamental
error of Romanism. He says: <q>Justification and sanctification are not to be distinguished
as chronologically and statically different. Justification and righteousness are
the same thing from different points of view. Pardon is not a mere declaration of forgiveness&mdash;a
merely arbitrary thing. Salvation introduces a new law into our sinful
nature which annuls the law of sin and destroys its penal and destructive consequences.
Forgiveness of sins must be in itself a gradual process. The final consequences of a
man's sins are written indelibly upon his nature and remain forever. When Christ
said: <q>Thy sins are forgiven thee</q>, it was an objective statement of a subjective fact.
The person was already in a state of living relation to Christ. The gospel is damnation
to the damnable, and invitation, love and mercy to those who feel their need of it. We
are saved through the enforcement of law on every one of us. Forgiveness consists in
the removal from consciousness of a sense of ill-desert. Justification, aside from its
forensic use, is a transformation and a promotion. Sense of forgiveness is a sense of
relief from a hated habit of mind.</q> This seems to us dangerously near to a denial that
justification is an act of God, and to an affirmation that it is simply a subjective change
in man's condition.
</p>

<p>
E. H. Johnson: <q>If Dr. Robinson had been content to say that the divine fiat of
justification had the manward effect of regeneration, he would have been correct; for
the verdict would be empty without this manward efficacy. But unfortunately, he
made the effect a part of the cause, identifying the divine justification with its human
fruition, the clearance of the past with the provision for the future.</q> We must grant
that the words <emph>inward</emph> and <emph>outward</emph> are misleading, for God is not under the law of
space, and the soul itself is not in space. Justification takes place just as much in man
as outside of him. Justification and regeneration take place at the same moment, but
logically God's act of renewing is the cause and God's act of approving is the effect.
Or we may say that regeneration and justification are both of them effects of our union
with Christ. <hi rend='italic'>Luke 1:37</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For no word from God shall be void of power.</hi></q> Regeneration and justification
may be different aspects of God's turning&mdash;his turning us, and his turning himself.
But it still is true that justification is a change in God and not in the creature.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Elements of Justification.</head>

<p>
These are two:
</p>

<p>
A. Remission of punishment.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) God acquits the ungodly who believe in Christ, and declares them
just. This is not to declare them innocent,&mdash;that would be a judgment
contrary to truth. It declares that the demands of the law have been satisfied
with regard to them, and that they are now free from its condemnation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 4:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is reckoned for
righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>John 3:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him should not perish</hi></q>;
see page <ref target='Pg856'>856</ref>, (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>), and Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:549. <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Being therefore justified by faith,
we have peace with God</hi></q>&mdash;not subjective peace or quietness of mind, but objective peace or
reconciliation, the opposite of the state of war, in which we are subject to the divine
wrath. Dale, Ephesians, 67&mdash;<q>Forgiveness may be defined: 1. in <emph>personal</emph> terms, as
<pb n='855'/><anchor id='Pg855'/>
a cessation of the anger or moral resentment of God against sin; 2. in <emph>ethical</emph> terms,
as a release from the guilt of sin which oppresses the conscience; 3. in <emph>legal</emph> terms, as a
remission of the punishment of sin, which is eternal death.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) This acquittal, in so far as it is the act of God as judge or executive,
administering law, may be denominated pardon. In so far as it is the act
of God as a father personally injured and grieved by sin, yet showing grace
to the sinner, it is denominated forgiveness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Micah 7:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Who is a God like into thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth over the transgression of the remnant
of his heritage?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 130:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But there is forgiveness with thee, That thou mayst be feared.</hi></q> It is hard for us
to understand God's feeling toward sin. Forgiveness seems easy to us, largely because
we are indifferent toward sin. But to the holy One, to whom sin is the abominable
thing which he hates, forgiveness involves a fundamental change of relation, and
nothing but Christ's taking the penalty of sin upon him can make it possible. B. Fay
Mills: <q>A tender spirited follower of Jesus Christ said to me, not long ago, that it had
taken him twelve years to forgive an injury that had been committed against him.</q>
How much harder for God to forgive, since he can never become indifferent to the
nature of the transgression!
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) In an earthly tribunal, there is no acquittal for those who are proved
to be transgressors,&mdash;for such there is only conviction and punishment.
But in God's government there is remission of punishment for believers,
even though they are confessedly offenders; and, in justification, God
declares this remission.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There is no forgiveness in nature. F. W. Robertson preached this. But he ignored
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vis medicatrix</foreign> of the gospel, in which forgiveness is offered to all. The natural conscience
says: <q>I must pay my debt.</q> But the believer finds that <q>Jesus paid it all.</q>
Illustrate by the poor man, who on coming to pay his mortgage finds that the owner at
death had ordered it to be burned, so that now there is nothing to pay. <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 34:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Jehovah
redeemeth the soul of his servants, And none of them that take refuge in him shall be condemned.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
A child disobeys his father and breaks his arm. His sin involves two penalties, the
alienation from his father and the broken arm. The father, on repentance, may forgive
his child. The personal relation is re-established, but the broken bone is not therefore
at once reknit. The father's forgiveness, however, will assure the father's help toward
complete healing. So justification does not ensure the immediate removal of all the
natural consequences of our sins. It does ensure present reconciliation and future
perfection. Clarke, Christian Theology, 364&mdash;<q>Justification is not equivalent to acquittal,
for acquittal declares that the man has not done wrong. Justification is rather the
acceptance of a man, on sufficient grounds, although he has done wrong.</q> As the Plymouth
Brethren say: <q>It is not the <emph>sin</emph>-question, but the <emph>Son</emph>-question.</q> <q><hi rend='italic'>Their sins and
their iniquities will I remember no more</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:17</hi>). The father did not allow the prodigal to complete
the confession he had prepared to make, but interrupted him, and dwelt only upon
his return home (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 15:22</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The declaration that the sinner is no longer exposed to the penalty
of law, has its ground, not in any satisfaction of the law's demand on the
part of the sinner himself, but solely in the bearing of the penalty by
Christ, to whom the sinner is united by faith. Justification, in its first
element, is therefore that act by which God, for the sake of Christ, acquits
the transgressor and suffers him to go free.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 13:38, 39</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Be it known unto you therefore, brethren, that through this man is proclaimed unto you remission
of sins: and by him</hi> [lit.: <q>in him</q>] <hi rend='italic'>every one that believeth is justified from all things, from which ye could not
be justified by the law of Moses</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 3:24, 26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is
in Christ Jesus ... that he might himself be just, and the justifier of him that hath faith in Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 6:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>but
ye were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in whom we have our redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
This acquittal is not to be conceived of as the sovereign act of a Governor, but rather
as a judicial procedure. Christ secures a new trial for those already condemned&mdash;a trial
<pb n='856'/><anchor id='Pg856'/>
in which he appears for the guilty, and sets over against their sin his own righteousness,
or rather shows them to be righteous in him. C. H. M.: <q>When Balak seeks to
curse the seed of Abraham, it is said of Jehovah: <q><hi rend='italic'>He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, Neither hath
he seen perverseness in Israel</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Num. 23:21</hi>). When Satan stands forth to rebuke Joshua, the word
is: <q><hi rend='italic'>Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan ... is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Zech. 3:2</hi>). Thus he ever
puts himself between his people and every tongue that would accuse them. <q><hi rend='italic'>Touch not mine
anointed ones</hi>,</q> he says, <q><hi rend='italic'>and do my prophets no harm</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 105:15</hi>). <q><hi rend='italic'>It is God that justifieth; who is he that
condemneth?</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:33, 34</hi>).</q> It is not sin, then, that condemns,&mdash;it is the failure to ask
pardon for sin, through Christ. Illustrate by the ring presented by Queen Elizabeth to
the Earl of Essex. Queen Elizabeth did not forgive the penitent Countess of Nottingham
for withholding the ring of Essex which would have purchased his pardon. She
shook the dying woman and cursed her, even while she was imploring forgiveness.
There is no such failure of mercy in God's administration.
</p>

<p>
Kaftan, in Am. Jour. Theology, 4:698&mdash;<q>The peculiar characteristic of Christian
experience is the forgiveness of sins, or reconciliation&mdash;a forgiveness which is conceived
as an unmerited gift of God, which is bestowed on man independently of his
own moral worthiness. Other religions have some measure of revelation, but Christianity
alone has the clear revelation of this forgiveness, and this is accepted by faith.
And forgiveness leads to a better ethics than any religion of works can show.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Restoration to favor.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Justification is more than remission or acquittal. These would
leave the sinner simply in the position of a discharged criminal,&mdash;law
requires a positive righteousness also. Besides deliverance from punishment,
justification implies God's treatment of the sinner as if he were, and
had been, personally righteous. The justified person receives not only
remission of penalty, but the rewards promised to obedience.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 15:22-24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Bring forth quickly the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on
his feet: and bring the fatted calf, and kill it, and let us eat, and make merry: for this my son was dead, and is alive
again; he was lost, and is found</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 3:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him should
... have eternal life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Being therefore justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ; through whom also we have had our access by faith into this grace wherein we stand; and we rejoice in
hope of the glory of God</hi></q>&mdash;<q><emph>this grace</emph></q> being a permanent state of divine favor; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But
of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who was made unto us wisdom from God, and righteousness and sanctification, and redemption:
that, according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that we might
become the righteousness of God in him.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 3:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Even as Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned unto him for righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the
exceeding riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in whom we have boldness and access in
confidence through our faith in him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:8, 9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I count all things to be loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord ... the righteousness which is from God by faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 1:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>reconciled in the body of
his flesh through death, to present you holy and without blemish and unreprovable before him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Tit. 3:4, 7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the
kindness of God our Savior ... that, being justified by his grace, we might be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 19:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And it was given unto her that she should array herself in fine linen, bright and pure: for
the fine linen is the righteous acts of the saints.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Justification is setting one right before law. But law requires not merely freedom
from offence negatively, but all manner of obedience and likeness to God positively.
Since justification is in Christ and by virtue of the believer's union with Christ, it puts
the believer on the same footing before the law that Christ is on, namely, not only
acquittal but favor. <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:16</hi>&mdash;Christ was himself <q><hi rend='italic'>justified in the spirit</hi>,</q> and the believer
partakes of <emph>his</emph> justification and of the whole of it, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, not only acquittal but favor.
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 13:39</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in him every one that believeth is justified</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, in Christ; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 6:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 4:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that we might receive the adoption of sons</hi></q>&mdash;a part of justification;
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>through whom we have now received the reconciliation</hi></q>&mdash;in justification; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that
we might become the righteousness of God in him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the righteousness which is from God by faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John
1:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to them gave he the right to become children of God</hi></q>&mdash;emphasis on <q><emph>gave</emph></q>&mdash;intimation that
the <q><emph>becoming children</emph></q> is not subsequent to the justification, but is a part of it.
</p>

<p>
Ellicott on <hi rend='italic'>Tit. 3:7</hi>&mdash;<q>δικαιοθέντες, <q><emph>justified</emph>,</q> in the usual and more strict theological
sense; not however as implying only a mere outward non-imputation of sin, but as
involving a <q>mutationem status,</q> an acceptance into new privileges, and an enjoyment
of the benefits thereof (Waterland, Justif, vol. vi, p. 5); in the words of the same writer:
<pb n='857'/><anchor id='Pg857'/>
<q>Justification cannot be conceived without some work of the Spirit in conferring a title
to salvation.</q></q> The prisoner who has simply served out his term escapes without further
punishment and that is all. But the pardoned man receives back in his pardon
the full rights of citizenship, can again vote, serve on juries, testify in court, and exercise
all his individual liberties, as the discharged convict cannot. The Society of Friends
is so called, not because they are friends to one another, but because they regard themselves
as friends of God. So, in the Middle Ages, Master Eckart, John Tauler, Henry
Suso, called themselves the friends of God, after the pattern of Abraham; <hi rend='italic'>2 Chron. 20:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Abraham
thy friend</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>James 2:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned unto him for righteousness; and
he was called the friend of God</hi></q>, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, one not merely acquitted from the charge of sin, but also
admitted into favor and intimacy with God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) This restoration to favor, viewed in its aspect as the renewal of a
broken friendship, is denominated reconciliation; viewed in its aspect as a
renewal of the soul's true relation to God as a father, it is denominated
adoption.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 1:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But as many as received him, to them gave he the right to become children of God, even to them that
believe on his name</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and not only so, but we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through
whom we have now received the reconciliation</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 4:4, 5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>born under the law, that he might redeem them that
were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>having foreordained us unto adoption as
sons through Jesus Christ unto himself</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for our
adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body</hi></q>&mdash;that is, this adoption is completed, so far as the body
is concerned, at the resurrection.
</p>

<p>
Luther called <hi rend='italic'>Psalms 32, 51, 130, 143</hi>, <q>the Pauline Psalms,</q> because these declare forgiveness
to be granted to the believer without law and without works. <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 130:3, 4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If thou,
Jehovah, shouldst mark iniquities, O Lord, who could stand? But there is forgiveness with thee, That thou mayest be
feared</hi></q> is followed by <hi rend='italic'>verses 7, 8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>O Israel, hope in Jehovah; For with Jehovah there is lovingkindness, And
with him is plenteous redemption. And he will redeem Israel From all his iniquities.</hi></q> Whitefield was rebuked
for declaring in a discourse that Christ would receive even the devil's castaways; but
that very day, while at dinner at Lady Huntington's, he was called out to meet two
women who were sinners, and to whose broken hearts and blasted lives that remark
gave hope and healing.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) In an earthly pardon there are no special helps bestowed upon the
pardoned. There are no penalties, but there are also no rewards; law cannot
claim anything of the discharged, but then they also can claim nothing
of the law. But what, though greatly needed, is left unprovided by human
government, God does provide. In justification, there is not only acquittal,
but approval; not only pardon, but promotion. Remission is never separated
from restoration.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
After serving a term in the penitentiary, the convict goes out with a stigma upon
him and with no friends. His past conviction and disgrace follow him. He cannot
obtain employment. He cannot vote. Want often leads him to commit crime again;
and then the old conviction is brought up as proof of bad character, and increases his
punishment. Need of Friendly Inns and Refuges for discharged criminals. But the
justified sinner is differently treated. He is not only delivered from God's wrath and
eternal death, but he is admitted to God's favor and eternal life. The discovery of this
is partly the cause of the convert's joy. Expecting pardon, at most, he is met with
unmeasured favor. The prodigal finds the father's house and heart open to him, and
more done for him than if he had never wandered. This overwhelms and subdues him.
The two elements, acquittal and restoration to favor, are never separated. Like the
expulsion of darkness and restoration of light, they always go together. No one can
have, even if he would have, an incomplete justification. Christ's justification is ours;
and, as Jesus' own seamless tunic could not be divided, so the robe of righteousness
which he provides cannot be cut in two.
</p>

<p>
Failure to apprehend this positive aspect of justification as restoration to favor is the
reason why so many Christians have little joy and little enthusiasm in their religious
lives. The preaching of the magnanimity and generosity of God makes the gospel <q><hi rend='italic'>the
power of God unto salvation</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 1:16</hi>). Edwin M. Stanton had ridden roughshod over Abraham
Lincoln in the conduct of a case at law in which they had been joint counsel.
<pb n='858'/><anchor id='Pg858'/>
Stanton had become vindictive and even violent when Lincoln was made President.
But Lincoln invited Stanton to be Secretary of War, and he sent the invitation by
Harding, who knew of all this former trouble. When Stanton heard it, he said with
streaming eyes: <q>Do you tell me, Harding, that Mr. Lincoln sent this message to me?
Tell him that such magnanimity will make me work with him as man was never served
before!</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The declaration that the sinner is restored to God's favor, has its
ground, not in the sinner's personal character or conduct, but solely in the
obedience and righteousness of Christ, to whom the sinner is united by
faith. Thus Christ's work is the procuring cause of our justification, in
both its elements. As we are acquitted on account of Christ's suffering of
the penalty of the law, so on account of Christ's obedience we receive the
rewards of law.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
All this comes to us in Christ. We participate in the rewards promised to his obedience:
<hi rend='italic'>John 20:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that believing ye may have life in his name</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 3:21-23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For all things are yours;
... all are yours; and ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's.</hi></q> Denovan, Toronto Baptist, Dec. 1883,
maintains that <q>grace operates in two ways: (1) for the <emph>rebel</emph> it provides a scheme of
<emph>justification</emph>,&mdash;this is judicial, matter of debt; (2) for the <emph>child</emph> it provides pardon,&mdash;fatherly
forgiveness on repentance.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 7:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the law made nothing perfect ... a bringing in
thereupon of a better hope, through which we draw nigh unto God.</hi></q> This <q><emph>better hope</emph></q> is offered to us in
Christ's death and resurrection. The veil of the temple was the symbol of separation
from God. The rending of that veil was the symbol on the one hand that sin had been
atoned for, and on the other hand that unrestricted access to God was now permitted
us in Christ the great forerunner. Bonar's hymn, <q>Jesus, whom angel hosts adore,</q>
has for its concluding stanza: <q>'T is finished all: the veil is rent. The welcome sure, the
access free:&mdash;Now then, we leave our banishment, O Father, to return to thee!</q> See
pages 749 (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>), 770 (<hi rend='italic'>h</hi>).
</p>

<p>
James Russell Lowell: <q>At the devil's booth all things are sold. Each ounce of dross
costs its ounce of gold; For a cap and bells our lives we pay: Bubbles we buy with a
whole soul's tasking; 'T is heaven alone that is given away, 'T is only God may be had
for the asking.</q> John G. Whittier: <q>The hour draws near, howe'er delayed and late,
When at the Eternal Gate, We leave the words and works we call our own, And lift
void hands alone For love to fill. Our nakedness of soul Brings to that gate no toll;
Giftless we come to him who all things gives, And live because he lives.</q>
</p>

<p>
H. B. Smith, System of Christian Doctrine, 523, 524&mdash;<q rend='pre'>Justification and pardon are
not the same in Scripture. We object to the view of Emmons (Works, vol. 5), that <q>justification
is no more nor less than pardon,</q> and that <q>God rewards men for their own,
and not Christ's, obedience,</q> for the reason that the words, as used in common life, relate
to wholly different things. If a man is declared just by a human tribunal, he is not
pardoned, he is acquitted; his own inherent righteousness, as respects the charge
against him, is recognized and declared. The gospel proclaims both pardon and justification.
There is no significance in the use of the word <q>justify,</q> if pardon be all that
is intended....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Justification involves what pardon does not, a righteousness which is the ground of
the acquittal and favor; not the mere favor of the sovereign, but the merit of Christ,
is at the basis&mdash;the righteousness which is of God. The ends of the law are so far satisfied
by what Christ has done, that the sinner can be pardoned. The law is not merely
set aside, but its great ends are answered by what Christ has done in our behalf. God
might pardon as a sovereign, from mere benevolence (as regard to happiness); but in
the gospel he does more,&mdash;he pardons in consistency with his holiness,&mdash;upholding that
as the main end of all his dealings and works. Justification involves acquittal from all
the penalty of the law, and the inheritance of all the blessings of the redeemed state.
The penalty of the law&mdash;spiritual, temporal, eternal death&mdash;is all taken away; and the
opposite blessings are conferred, in and through Christ&mdash;the resurrection to blessedness,
the gift of the Spirit, and eternal life....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If justification is forgiveness simply, it applies only to the <emph>past</emph>. If it is also a title to
life, it includes the future condition of the soul. The latter alone is consistent with the
plan and decrees of God respecting redemption&mdash;his seeing the end from the beginning.
The reason why justification has been taken as pardon is two-fold: first, it <emph>does</emph> involve
<pb n='859'/><anchor id='Pg859'/>
pardon,&mdash;this is its negative side, while it has a positive side also&mdash;the title to eternal
life; secondly, the tendency to resolve the gospel into an ethical system. Only our acts
of choice as meritorious could procure a title to favor, a positive reward. Christ might
remove the obstacle, but the title to heaven is derived only from what we ourselves do.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Justification is, therefore, not a merely governmental provision, as it must be on
any scheme that denies that Christ's work has direct respect to the ends of the law.
Views of the atonement determine the views on justification, if logical sequence is
observed. We have to do here, not with views of natural justice, but with divine
methods. If we regard the atonement simply as answering the ends of a governmental
scheme, our view must be that justification merely removes an obstacle, and the end of
it is only pardon, and not eternal life.</q>
</p>

<p>
But upon the true view, that the atonement is a complete satisfaction to the holiness
of God, justification embraces not merely pardon, or acquittal from the punishments of
law, but also restoration to favor, or the rewards promised to actual obedience. See
also Quenstedt, 3:524; Philippi, Active Obedience of Christ; Shedd, Dogm. Theol.,
2:432, 433.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. Relation of Justification to God's Law and Holiness.</head>

<p>
A. Justification has been shown to be a forensic term. A man may,
indeed, be conceived of as just, in either of two senses: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) as just in
moral character,&mdash;that is, absolutely holy in nature, disposition, and conduct;
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) as just in relation to law,&mdash;or as free from all obligation to suffer
penalty, and as entitled to the rewards of obedience.
</p>

<p>
So, too, a man may be conceived of as justified, in either of two senses:
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) made just in moral character; or, (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) made just in his relation to law.
But the Scriptures declare that there does not exist on earth a just man, in
the first of these senses (Eccl. 7:20). Even in those who are renewed in
moral character and united to Christ, there is a remnant of moral depravity.
</p>

<p>
If, therefore, there be any such thing as a just man, he must be just, not
in the sense of possessing an unspotted holiness, but in the sense of being
delivered from the penalty of law, and made partaker of its rewards. If
there be any such thing as justification, it must be, not an act of God
which renders the sinner absolutely holy, but an act of God which declares
the sinner to be free from legal penalties and entitled to legal rewards.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Justus</foreign> is derived from <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jus</foreign>, and suggests the idea of courts and legal procedures. The
fact that <q>justify</q> is derived from <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>justus</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>facio</foreign>, and might therefore seem to imply
the making of a man subjectively righteous, should not blind us to its forensic use. The
phrases <q><hi rend='italic'>sanctify the Holy One of Jacob</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Is. 29:23</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 3:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>sanctify in your hearts Christ as Lord</hi></q>)
and <q><hi rend='italic'>glorify God</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 6:20</hi>) do not mean, to <emph>make</emph> God subjectively holy or glorious, for
this he <emph>is</emph>, whatever we may do; they mean rather, to <emph>declare</emph>, or <emph>show</emph>, him to be holy or
glorious. So justification is not making a man righteous, or even pronouncing him
righteous, for no man <emph>is</emph> subjectively righteous. It is rather to count him righteous so
far as respects his relations to law, to treat him as righteous, or to declare that God will,
for reasons assigned, so treat him (Payne). So long as any remnant of sin exists, no
justification, in the sense of making holy, can be attributed to man: <hi rend='italic'>Eccl. 7:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Surely
there is not a righteous man upon earth, that doeth good and sinneth not.</hi></q> If no man is just, in this sense,
then God cannot pronounce him just, for God cannot lie. Justification, therefore, must
signify a deliverance from legal penalties, and an assignment of legal rewards. O. P.
Gifford: There is no such thing as <q>salvation <emph>by</emph> character</q>; what men need is salvation
<emph>from</emph> character. The only sense in which salvation by character is rational or
Scriptural is that suggested by George Harris, Moral Evolution, 409&mdash;<q>Salvation by
character is not self-righteousness, but Christ in us.</q> But even here it must be remembered
that Christ <emph>in</emph> us presupposes Christ <emph>for</emph> us. The objective atonement for sin
must come before the subjective purification of our natures. And justification is upon
the ground of that objective atonement, and not upon the ground of the subjective
cleansing.
</p>

<pb n='860'/><anchor id='Pg860'/>

<p>
The Jews had a proverb that if only one man could perfectly keep the whole law even
for one day, the kingdom of Messiah would at once come upon the earth. This is to
state in another form the doctrine of Paul, in <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 7:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>When the commandment came, sin revived,
and I died.</hi></q> To recognize the impossibility of being justified by Pharisaic works was a
preparation for the gospel; see Bruce, Apologetics, 419. The Germans speak of Werk-,
Lehre-, Buchstaben-, Negations-, Parteigerechtigkeit; but all these are forms of self-righteousness.
Berridge: <q>A man may steal some gems from the crown of Jesus and
be guilty only of petty larceny, ... but the man who would justify himself by his
own works steals the crown itself, puts it on his own head, and proclaims himself by
his own conquests a king in Zion.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The difficult feature of justification is the declaration, on the part of
God, that a sinner whose remaining sinfulness seems to necessitate the vindicative
reaction of God's holiness against him, is yet free from such reaction
of holiness as is expressed in the penalties of the law.
</p>

<p>
The fact is to be accepted on the testimony of Scripture. If this testimony
be not accepted, there is no deliverance from the condemnation of law. But
the difficulty of conceiving of God's declaring the sinner no longer exposed
to legal penalty is relieved, if not removed, by the three-fold consideration:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That Christ has endured the penalty of the law in the sinner's stead.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 3:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us.</hi></q> Denovan: <q>We
are justified by faith, instrumentally, in the same sense as a debt is paid by a good note
or a check on a substantial account in a distant bank. It is only the intelligent and
honest acceptance of justification already provided.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God, sending his own Son
... condemned sin in the flesh</hi></q> = the believer's sins were judged and condemned on Calvary.
The way of pardon through Christ honors God's justice as well as God's mercy; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Rom.
3:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that he might himself be just, and the justifier of him that hath faith in Jesus.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the sinner is so united to Christ, that Christ's life already constitutes
the dominating principle within him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 2:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I have been crucified with Christ; and it is no longer I that live, but Christ liveth in me.</hi></q> God
does not justify any man whom he does not foresee that he can and will sanctify. Some
prophecies produce their own fulfilment. Tell a man he is brave, and you help him to
become so. So declaratory justification, when published in the heart by the Holy
Spirit, helps to make men just. Harris, God the Creator, 2:332&mdash;<q>The objection to the
doctrine of justification by faith insists that justification must be conditioned, not on
faith, but on right character. But justification by faith is itself the doctrine of a justification
conditioned on right character, because faith in God is the only possible beginning
of right character, either in men or angels.</q> Gould, Bib. Theol. N. T., 67-79, in a
similar manner argues that Paul's emphasis is on the spiritual effect of the death of our
Lord, rather than on its expiatory effect. The course of thought in the Epistle to the
Romans seems to us to contradict this view. Sin and the objective atonement for sin
are first treated; only after justification comes the sanctification of the believer. Still
it is true that justification is never the sole work of God in the soul. The same Christ
in union with whom we are justified does at that same moment a work of regeneration
which is followed by sanctification.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That this life of Christ is a power in the soul which will gradually,
but infallibly, extirpate all remaining depravity, until the whole physical
and moral nature is perfectly conformed to the divine holiness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be conformed to the body of his glory,
according to the working whereby he is able even to subject all things unto himself</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 3:1-4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If then ye were
raised together with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is, seated on the right hand of God. Set your
mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are upon the earth. For ye died, and your life is hid with
Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall be manifested, then shall ye also with him be manifested in glory.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Truth of fact, and ideal truth, are not opposed to each other. F. W. Robertson, Lectures
and Addresses, 256&mdash;<q>When the agriculturist sees a small, white, almond-like
thing rising from the ground, he calls that an oak; but this is not a truth of fact, it is
<pb n='861'/><anchor id='Pg861'/>
an ideal truth. The oak is a large tree, with spreading branches and leaves and acorns;
but that is only a thing an inch long, and imperceptible in all its development; yet the
agriculturist sees in it the idea of what it shall be, and, if I may borrow a Scriptural
phrase, he <emph>imputes</emph> to it the majesty, and excellence, and glory, that is to be hereafter.</q>
This method of representation is effective and unobjectionable, so long as we remember
that the force which is to bring about this future development and perfection is
not the force of unassisted human nature, but rather the force of Christ and his
indwelling Spirit. See Philippi, Glaubenslehre, v, 1:201-208.
</p>

<p>
Gore, Incarnation, 224&mdash;<q>'Looking at the mother,' wrote George Eliot of Mrs. Garth
in The Mill on the Floss, <q>you might hope that the daughter would become like her&mdash;which
is a prospective advantage equal to a dowry&mdash;the mother too often standing
behind the daughter like a malignant prophecy: Such as I am, she will shortly be.</q>
George Eliot imputes by anticipation to the daughter the merits of the mother, because
her life is, so to speak, of the same piece. Now, by new birth and spiritual union, our
life is of the same piece with the life of Jesus. Thus he, our elder brother, stands
behind us, his people, as a prophecy of all good. Thus God accepts us, deals with us,
<q><emph>in the Beloved</emph>,</q> rating us at something of his value, imputing to us his merits, because in
fact, except we be reprobates, he himself is the most powerful and real force at work
in us.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>5. Relation of Justification to Union with Christ and the Work of
the Spirit.</head>

<p>
A. Since the sinner, at the moment of justification, is not yet completely
transformed in character, we have seen that God can declare him
just, not on account of what he is in himself, but only on account of what
Christ is. The ground of justification is therefore not, (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) as the Romanists
hold, a new righteousness and love infused into us, and now constituting
our moral character; nor, (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) as Osiander taught, the essential righteousness
of Christ's divine nature, which has become ours by faith; but (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the
satisfaction and obedience of Christ, as the head of a new humanity, and
as embracing in himself all believers as his members.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Ritschl regarded justification as primarily an endowment of the church, in which the
individual participated only so far as he belonged to the church; see Pfleiderer, Die
Ritschl'sche Theologie, 70. Here Ritschl committed an error like that of the Romanist,&mdash;the
church is the door to Christ, instead of Christ being the door to the church. Justification
belongs primarily to Christ, then to all who join themselves to Christ by faith,
and the church is the natural and voluntary aggregation of those who in Christ are
thus justified. Hence the necessity for the resurrection and ascension of the Lord
Jesus. <q>For as the ministry of Enoch was sealed by his reception into heaven, and as
the ministry of Elijah was also abundantly proved by his translation, so also the righteousness
and innocence of Christ. But it was necessary that the ascension of Christ
should be more fully attested, because upon his righteousness, so fully proved by his
ascension, we must depend for all our righteousness. For if God had not approved him
after his resurrection, and he had not taken his seat at his right hand, we could by no
means be accepted of God</q> (Cartwright).
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 46, 193, 195, 206&mdash;<q>Christ must be justified in the
spirit and received up into glory, before he can be made righteousness to us and we can
become the righteousness of God in him. Christ's coronation is the indispensable condition
of our justification.... Christ the High Priest has entered the Holy of Holies
in heaven for us. Until he comes forth again at the second advent, how can we be
assured that his sacrifice for us is accepted? We reply: By the gift of the Holy Spirit.
The presence of the Spirit in the church is the proof of the presence of Christ before
the throne.... The Holy Spirit convinces of righteousness, <q><hi rend='italic'>because I go unto the Father, and
ye see me no more</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 16:10</hi>). We can only know that <q><hi rend='italic'>we have a Paraclete with the Father, even Jesus
Christ the Righteous</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 John 2:1</hi>), by that <q><hi rend='italic'>other Paraclete</hi></q> sent forth from the Father, even the
Holy Spirit (<hi rend='italic'>John 14:25, 26; 15:26</hi>). The church, having the Spirit, reflects Christ to the
world. As Christ manifests the Father, so the church through the Spirit manifests
Christ. So Christ gives to us his name, <q>Christians,</q> as the husband gives his name to
the wife.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='862'/><anchor id='Pg862'/>

<p>
As Adam's sin is imputed to us, not because Adam is in us, but because
we were in Adam; so Christ's righteousness is imputed to us, not because
Christ is in us, but because we are in Christ,&mdash;that is, joined by faith to
one whose righteousness and life are infinitely greater than our power to
appropriate or contain. In this sense, we may say that we are justified
through a Christ outside of us, as we are sanctified through a Christ within
us. Edwards: <q>The justification of the believer is no other than his being
admitted to communion in, or participation of, this head and surety of all
believers.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 1:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>faith and love which is in Christ Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He who was manifested in the flesh, Justified in
the spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 13:39</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and by him</hi> [lit.: <q><hi rend='italic'>in him</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>every one that believeth is justified from all things, from
which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 4:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who was delivered up for our trespasses, and was
raised for our justification</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>accepted in the Beloved</hi></q>&mdash;Rev. Vers.: <q><hi rend='italic'>freely bestowed on us in the
Beloved</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 6:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.</hi></q> <q>We in Christ</q> is the formula
of our justification; <q>Christ in us</q> is the formula of our sanctification. As the water
which the shell contains is little compared with the great ocean which contains the
shell, so the actual change wrought within us by God's sanctifying grace is slight compared
with the boundless freedom from condemnation and the state of favor with
God into which we are introduced by justification; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Being therefore justified by
faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; through whom also we have had our access by faith into
this grace wherein we stand; and we rejoice in hope of the glory of God.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Here we have the third instance of imputation. The first was the imputation of
Adam's sin to us; and the second was the imputation of our sins to Christ. The third
is now the imputation of Christ's righteousness to us. In each of the former cases, we
have sought to show that the legal relation presupposes a natural relation. Adam's sin
is imputed to us, because we are one with Adam; our sins are imputed to Christ, because
Christ is one with humanity. So here, we must hold that Christ's righteousness is
imputed to us, because we are one with Christ. Justification is not an arbitrary transfer
to us of the merits of another with whom we have no real connection. This would
make it merely a legal fiction; and there are no legal fictions in the divine government.
</p>

<p>
Instead of this external and mechanical method of conception, we should first set
before us the fact of Christ's justification, after he had borne our sins and risen from the
dead. In him, humanity, for the first time, is acquitted from punishment and restored
to the divine favor. But Christ's new humanity is the germinal source of spiritual life
for the race. He was justified, not simply as a private person, but as our representative
and head. By becoming partakers of the new life in him, we share in all he is and all
he has done; and, first of all, we share in his justification. So Luther gives us, for substance,
the formula: <q>We in Christ = justification; Christ in us = sanctification.</q> And
in harmony with this formula is the statement quoted in the text above from Edwards,
Works, 4:66.
</p>

<p>
See also H. B. Smith, Presb. Rev., July, 1881&mdash;<q>Union with Adam and with Christ is
the ground of imputation. But the parallelism is incomplete. While the sin of Adam
is imputed to us because it is ours, the righteousness of Christ is imputed to us simply
because of our union with him, not at all because of our personal righteousness. In
the one case, character is taken into the account; in the other, it is not. In sin, our
demerits are included; in justification, our merits are excluded.</q> For further statements
of Dr. Smith, see his System of Christian Theology, 524-552.
</p>

<p>
C. H. M. on Genesis, page 78&mdash;<q>The question for every believer is not <q>What am I?</q>
but <q>What is Christ?</q> Of Abel it is said: <q><hi rend='italic'>God testified of his gifts</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 11:4</hi>, A. V.). So God
testifies, not of the believer, but of his gift,&mdash;and his gift is Christ. Yet Cain was angry
because he was not received <emph>in his sins</emph>, while Abel was accepted <emph>in his gift</emph>. This was
right, if Abel was justified in himself; it was wrong, because Abel was justified only in
Christ.</q> See also Hodge, Outlines of Theology, 384-388, 392; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 448.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The relation of justification to regeneration and sanctification, moreover,
delivers it from the charges of externality and immorality. God does
not justify ungodly men in their ungodliness. He pronounces them just
only as they are united to Christ, who is absolutely just, and who, by his
<pb n='863'/><anchor id='Pg863'/>
Spirit, can make them just, not only in the eye of the law, but in moral
character. The very faith by which the sinner receives Christ is an act in
which he ratifies all that Christ has done, and accepts God's judgment
against sin as his own (John 16:11).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 16:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>of judgment, because the prince of this world hath been judged</hi></q>&mdash;the Holy Spirit leads the
believer to ratify God's judgment against sin and Satan. Accepting Christ, the believer
accepts Christ's death for sin, and resurrection to life for his own. If it were otherwise,
the first act of the believer, after his discharge, might be a repetition of his offences.
Such a justification would offend against the fundamental principles of justice and the
safety of government. It would also fail to satisfy the conscience. This clamors not
only for pardon, but for renewal. Union with Christ has one legal fruit&mdash;justification;
but it has also one moral fruit&mdash;sanctification.
</p>

<p>
A really guilty man, when acquitted by judge and jury, does not cease to be the victim
of remorse and fear. Forgiveness of sin is not in itself a deliverance from sin.
The outward acquittal needs to be accompanied by an inward change to be really effective.
Pardon for sin without power to overcome sin would be a mockery of the criminal.
Justification for Christ's sake therefore goes into effect through regeneration by the
Holy Spirit; see E. H. Johnson, in Bib. Sac., July, 1892:362.
</p>

<p>
A Buddhist priest who had studied some years in England printed in Shanghai not long
ago a pamphlet entitled <q>Justification by Faith the only true Basis of Morality.</q> It
argues that any other foundation is nothing but pure selfishness, but that morality, to
have any merit, must be unselfish. Justification by faith supplies an unselfish motive,
because we accept the work done for us by another, and we ourselves work from gratitude,
which is not a selfish motive. After laying down this Christian foundation, the
writer erects the structure of faith in the Amida incarnation of Buddha. Buddhism
opposes to the Christian doctrine of a creative Person, only a creative process; sin has
relation only to the man sinning, and has no relation to Amida Buddha or to the eternal
law of causation; salvation by faith in Amida Buddha is faith in one who is the
product of a process, and a product may perish. Tennyson: <q>They are but broken
lights of Thee, And thou, O Christ, art more than they.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Justification is possible, therefore, because it is always accompanied by
regeneration and union with Christ, and is followed by sanctification. But
this is a very different thing from the Romanist confounding of justification
and sanctification, as different stages of the same process of making the
sinner actually holy. It holds fast to the Scripture distinction between
justification as a declarative act of God, and regeneration and sanctification
as those efficient acts of God by which justification is accompanied and followed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Both history and our personal observation show that nothing can change the life and
make men moral, like the gospel of free pardon in Jesus Christ. Mere preaching of
morality will effect nothing of consequence. There never has been more insistence
upon morality than in the most immoral times, like those of Seneca, and of the English
deists. As to their moral fruits, we can safely compare Protestant with Roman Catholic
systems and leaders and countries. We do not become right by doing right, for only
those can do right who have become right. The prodigal son is forgiven before he
actually confesses and amends (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 15:20, 21</hi>). Justification is always accompanied by
regeneration, and is followed by sanctification; and all three are results of the death
of Christ. But the sin-offering must precede the thank-offering. We must first be
accepted ourselves before we can offer gifts; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 11:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent
sacrifice than Cain, through which he had witness borne to him that he was righteous, God bearing witness in respect
of his gifts.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Hence we read in <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 5:25, 26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Christ also loved the church, and gave himself up for it; that he might
sanctify it, having cleansed</hi> = [after he had cleansed] <hi rend='italic'>it by the washing of water with the word</hi></q> [= regeneration];
<hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>elect ... according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of the
Spirit</hi> [regeneration], <hi rend='italic'>unto obedience</hi> [conversion] <hi rend='italic'>and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ</hi> [justification]</q>;
<hi rend='italic'>1 John 1:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood
of Jesus his Son cleanseth us from all sin</hi></q>&mdash;here the <q>cleansing</q> refers primarily and mainly to
<pb n='864'/><anchor id='Pg864'/>
justification, not to sanctification; for the apostle himself declares in <hi rend='italic'>verse 8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Quenstedt says well, that <q>justification, since it is an act, outside of man, in God,
cannot produce an intrinsic change in us.</q> And yet, he says, <q>although faith alone
justifies, yet faith is not alone.</q> Melanchthon: <q>Sola fides justificat; sed fides non est
sola.</q> With faith go all manner of gifts of the Spirit and internal graces of character.
But we should let go all the doctrinal gains of the Reformation if we did not insist that
these gifts and graces are accompaniments and consequences of justification, instead
of being a part or a ground of justification. See Girdlestone, O. T. Synonyms, 104,
note&mdash;<q>Justification is God's declaration that the individual sinner, on account of the
faith which unites him to Christ, is taken up into the relation which Christ holds to
the Father, and has applied to him personally the objective work accomplished for
humanity by Christ.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>6. Relation of Justification to Faith.</head>

<p>
A. We are justified by faith, rather than by love or by any other grace:
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) not because faith is itself a work of obedience by which we merit
justification,&mdash;for this would be a doctrine of justification by works; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>)
nor because faith is accepted as an equivalent of obedience,&mdash;for there is
no equivalent except the perfect obedience of Christ; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) nor because
faith is the germ from which obedience may spring hereafter,&mdash;for it is
not the faith which accepts, but the Christ who is accepted, that renders
such obedience possible; but (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) because faith, and not repentance, or
love, or hope, is the medium or instrument by which we receive Christ and
are united to him. Hence we are never said to be justified διὰ πίστιν, = on
account of faith, but only διὰ πίστεως, = through faith, or ἐκ πίστεως, =
by faith. Or, to express the same truth in other words, while the grace
of God is the efficient cause of justification, and the obedience and sufferings
of Christ are the meritorious or procuring cause, faith is the mediate
or instrumental cause.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Edwards, Works, 4:69-73&mdash;<q>Faith justifies, because faith includes the whole act of
unition to Christ as a Savior. It is not the nature of any other graces or virtues
directly to close with Christ as a mediator, any further than they enter into the constitution
of justifying faith, and do belong to its nature</q>; Observations on Trinity,
64-67&mdash;<q>Salvation is not offered to us upon any condition, but freely and for nothing.
We are to do nothing for it,&mdash;we are only to take it. This taking and receiving is
faith.</q> H. B. Smith, System, 524&mdash;<q>An internal change is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sine qua non</foreign> of justification,
but not its meritorious ground.</q> Give a man a gold mine. It is <emph>his</emph>. He has not
to work <emph>for</emph> it; he has only to work <emph>it</emph>. Working <emph>for</emph> life is one thing; working <emph>from</emph>
life is quite another. The marriage of a poor girl to a wealthy proprietor makes her
possessor of his riches despite her former poverty. Yet her acceptance has not <emph>purchased</emph>
wealth. It is hers, not because of what she is or has done, but because of what
her husband is and has done. So faith is the condition of justification, only because
through it Christ becomes ours, and with him his atonement and righteousness. Salvation
comes not because our faith saves us, but because it links us to the Christ who
saves; and believing is only the link. There is no more merit in it than in the beggar's
stretching forth his hand to receive the offered purse, or the drowning man's grasping
the rope that is thrown to him.
</p>

<p>
The Wesleyan scheme is inclined to make faith a work. See Dabney, Theology, 637.
This is to make faith <emph>the</emph> cause and ground, or at least to add it to Christ's work as a
<emph>joint</emph> cause and ground, of justification; as if justification were διὰ πίστιν, instead of
διὰ πίστεως or ἐκ πίστεως. Since faith is never perfect, this is to go back to the Roman
Catholic uncertainty of salvation. See Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:744, 745 (Syst. Doct.,
4:206, 207). C. H. M. on <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 3:7</hi>&mdash;<q>They made themselves aprons of fig-leaves, before
God made them coats of skin. Man ever tries to clothe himself in garments of his own
righteousness, before he will take the robe of Christ's. But Adam felt himself naked
when God visited him, even though he had his fig-leaves on him.</q>
</p>

<pb n='865'/><anchor id='Pg865'/>

<p>
We are justified efficiently by the grace of God, meritoriously by Christ, instrumentally
by faith, evidentially by works. Faith justifies, as roots bring plant and soil
together. Faith connects man with the source of life in Christ. <q>When the boatman
with his hook grapples the rock, he does not pull the shore to the boat, but the boat to
the shore; so, when we by faith lay hold on Christ, we do not pull Christ to us, but ourselves
to him.</q> Faith is a coupling; the train is drawn, not by the coupling, but by the
locomotive; yet without the coupling it would not be drawn. Faith is the trolley that
reaches up to the electric wire; when the connection is sundered, not only does the
car cease to move, but the heat dies and the lights go out. Dr. John Duncan: <q>I have
married the Merchant and all his wealth is mine!</q>
</p>
<p>
H. C. Trumbull: <q>If a man wants to cross the ocean, he can either try swimming, or
he can trust the captain of a ship to carry him over in his vessel. By or through his
faith in that captain, the man is carried safely to the other shore; yet it is the ship's
captain, not the passenger's faith, which is to be praised for the carrying.</q> So the
sick man trusts his case in the hands of his physician, and his life is saved by the physician,&mdash;yet
by or through the patient's faith. This faith is indeed an inward act of
allegiance, and no mere outward performance. Whiton, Divine Satisfaction, 92&mdash;<q>The
Protestant Reformers saw that it was by an inward act, not by penances or sacraments
that men were justified. But they halted in the crude notion of a legal court
room process, a governmental procedure external to us, whereas it is an educational,
inward process, the awakening through Christ of the filial spirit in us, which in the
midst of imperfections strives for likeness more and more to the Son of God. Justification
by principle apart from performance makes Christianity the religion of the
spirit.</q> We would add that such justification excludes education, and is an act rather
than a process, an act external to the sinner rather than internal, an act of God rather
than an act of man. The justified person can say to Christ, as Ruth said to Boaz:
<q><hi rend='italic'>Why have I found favor in thy sight, that thou shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing I am a foreigner?</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Ruth 2:10</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Since the ground of justification is only Christ, to whom we are
united by faith, the justified person has peace. If it were anything in
ourselves, our peace must needs be proportioned to our holiness. The
practical effect of the Romanist mingling of works with faith, as a joint
ground of justification, is to render all assurance of salvation impossible.
(Council of Trent, 9th chap.: <q>Every man, by reason of his own weakness
and defects, must be in fear and anxiety about his state of grace.
Nor can any one know, with infallible certainty of faith, that he has
received forgiveness of God.</q>). But since justification is an instantaneous
act of God, complete at the moment of the sinner's first believing, it has
no degrees. Weak faith justifies as perfectly as strong faith; although,
since justification is a secret act of God, weak faith does not give so strong
assurance of salvation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Foundations of our Faith, 216&mdash;<q>The Catholic doctrine declares that justification is
not dependent upon faith and the righteousness of Christ imputed and granted thereto,
but on the actual condition of the man himself. But there remain in the man an undeniable
amount of fleshly lusts or inclinations to sin, even though the man be regenerate.
The Catholic doctrine is therefore constrained to assert that these lusts are not in themselves
sinful, or objects of the divine displeasure. They are allowed to remain in the
man, that he may struggle against them; and, as they say, Paul designates them as sinful,
only because they are derived from sin, and incite to sin; but they only become
sin by the positive concurrence of the human will. But is not internal lust displeasing
to God? Can we draw the line between lust and will? The Catholic favors self here,
and makes many things <emph>lust</emph>, which are really <emph>will</emph>. A Protestant is necessarily more
earnest in the work of salvation, when he recognizes even the evil desire as sin, according
to Christ's precept.</q>
</p>

<p>
All systems of religion of merely human origin tend to make salvation, in larger or
smaller degree, the effect of human works, but only with the result of leaving man in
despair. See, in Ecclesiasticus 3:30, an Apocryphal declaration that alms make atonement
for sin. So Romanism bids me doubt God's grace and the forgiveness of sins.
<pb n='866'/><anchor id='Pg866'/>
See Dorner, Gesch. prot. Theol., 228, 229, and his quotations from Luther. <q>But if the
Romanist doctrine is true, that a man is justified only in such measure as he is sanctified,
then: 1. Justification must be a matter of degrees, and so the Council of Trent
declares it to be. The sacraments which sanctify are therefore essential, that one may
be increasingly justified. 2. Since justification is a continuous process, the redeeming
death of Christ, on which it depends, must be a continuous process also; hence its prolonged
reiteration in the sacrifice by the Mass. 3. Since sanctification is obviously
never completed in this life, no man ever dies completely justified; hence the doctrine
of Purgatory.</q> For the substance of Romanist doctrine, see Moehler, Symbolism, 79-190;
Newman, Lectures on Justification, 253-345; Ritschl, Christian Doctrine of Justification,
121-226.
</p>

<p>
A better doctrine is that of the Puritan divine: <q>It is not the quantity of thy faith
that shall save thee. A drop of water is as true water as the whole ocean. So a little
faith is as true faith as the greatest. It is not the measure of thy faith that saves
thee,&mdash;it is the blood that it grips to that saves thee. The weak hand of the child, that
leads the spoon to the mouth, will feed as well as the strong arm of a man; for it is not
the hand that feeds, but the meat. So, if thou canst grip Christ ever so weakly, he will
not let thee perish.</q> I am troubled about the money I owe in New York, until I find
that a friend has paid my debt there. When I find that the objective account against
me is cancelled, then and only then do I have subjective peace.
</p>

<p>
A child may be heir to a vast estate, even while he does not know it; and a child of
God may be an heir of glory, even while, through the weakness of his faith, he is
oppressed with painful doubts and fears. No man is lost simply because of the greatness
of his sins; however ill-deserving he may be, faith in Christ will save him.
Luther's climbing the steps of St. John Lateran, and the voice of thunder: <q>The just
shall live by faith,</q> are not certain as historical facts; but they express the substance
of Luther's experience. Not obeying, but receiving, is the substance of the gospel.
A man cannot merit salvation; he cannot buy it; but one thing he must do,&mdash;he must
take it. And the least faith makes salvation ours, because it makes Christ ours.
</p>

<p>
Augustine conceived of justification as a continuous process, proceeding until love
and all Christian virtues fill the heart. There is his chief difference from Paul. Augustine
believes in sin and grace. But he has not the freedom of the children of God, as
Paul has. The influence of Augustine upon Roman Catholic theology has not been
wholly salutary. The Roman Catholic, mixing man's subjective condition with God's
grace as a ground of justification, continually wavers between self-righteousness and
uncertainty of acceptance with God, each of these being fatal to a healthful and stable
religious life. High-church Episcopalians, and Sacramentalists generally, are afflicted
with this distemper of the Romanists. Dr. R. W. Dale remarks with regard to Dr.
Pusey: <q>The absence of joy in his religious life was only the inevitable effect of his
conception of God's method of saving men; in parting with the Lutheran truth concerning
justification, he parted with the springs of gladness.</q> Spurgeon said that a
man might get from London to New York provided he took a steamer; but it made
much difference in his comfort whether he had a first class or a second class ticket. A
new realization of the meaning of justification in our churches would change much of
our singing from the minor to the major key; would lead us to pray, not <emph>for</emph> the presence
of Christ, but <emph>from</emph> the presence of Christ; would abolish the mournful upward
inflections at the end of sentences which give such unreality to our preaching; and
would replace the pessimistic element in our modern work and worship with the notes
of praise and triumph. In the Pilgrim's Progress, the justification of the believer is
symbolized by Christian's lodging in the Palace Beautiful whose window opened toward
the sunrising.
</p>

<p>
Even Luther did not fully apprehend and apply his favorite doctrine of justification
by faith. Harnack, Wesen des Christenthums, 168 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, states the fundamental principles
of Protestantism as: <q>1. The Christian religion is wholly given in the word of
God and in the inner experience which answers to that word. 2. The assured belief
that the Christian has a gracious God. <q>Nun weisz und glaub' ich's feste, Ich rühm's
auch ohne Scheu, Dasz Gott, der höchst' und beste, Mein Freund und Vater sei; Und
dasz in allen Fällen Er mir zur Rechten steh', Und dampfe Sturm und Wellen,
Und was mir bringet Weh'.</q> 3. Restoration of simple and believing worship, both
public and private. But Luther took too much dogma into Christianity; insisted too
much on the authority of the written word; cared too much for the <emph>means</emph> of grace,
such as the Lord's Supper; identified the church too much with the organized body.</q>
<pb n='867'/><anchor id='Pg867'/>
Yet Luther talked of beating the heads of the Wittenbergers with the Bible, so as to
get the great doctrine of justification by faith into their brains. <q>Why do you teach
your child the same thing twenty times?</q> he said. <q>Because I find that nineteen
times is not sufficient.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. Justification is instantaneous, complete, and final: instantaneous,
since otherwise there would be an interval during which the soul was
neither approved nor condemned by God (Mat. 6:24); complete, since
the soul, united to Christ by faith, becomes partaker of his complete satisfaction
to the demands of law (Col. 2:9, 10); and final, since the union
with Christ is indissoluble (John 10:28, 29). As there are many acts of
sin in the life of the Christian, so there are many acts of pardon following
them. But all these acts of pardon are virtually implied in that first act
by which he was finally and forever justified; as also successive acts of
repentance and faith, after such sins, are virtually implied in that first
repentance and faith which logically preceded justification.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 6:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>No man can serve two masters</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:9, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily, and in him ye are made full, who is the head of all principality and power</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 10:28, 29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they shall
never perish, and no one shall snatch them out of my hand. My Father, who hath given them unto me, is greater than
all; and no one is able to snatch them out of the Father's hand.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Plymouth Brethren say truly that the Christian has sin in him, but not on him,
because Christ had sin on him, but not in him. The Christian has sin but not guilt,
because Christ had guilt but not sin. All our sins are buried in the grave with Christ,
and Christ's resurrection is our resurrection. Toplady: <q>From whence this fear and
unbelief? Hast thou, O Father, put to grief Thy spotless Son for me? And will the
righteous Judge of men Condemn me for that debt of sin, Which, Lord, was laid on
thee? If thou hast my discharge procured, And freely in my room endured The whole
of wrath divine, Payment God cannot twice demand, First at my bleeding Surety's
hand, And then again at mine. Complete atonement thou hast made, And to the
utmost farthing paid Whate'er thy people owed; How then can wrath on me take
place, If sheltered in thy righteousness And sprinkled with thy blood? Turn, then, my
soul, unto thy rest; The merits of thy great High-priest Speak peace and liberty;
Trust in his efficacious blood, Nor fear thy banishment from God, Since Jesus died for
thee!</q>
</p>

<p>
Justification, however, is not eternal in the past. We are to repent unto the remission
of our sins (<hi rend='italic'>Act 2:38</hi>). Remission comes after repentance. Sin is not pardoned
before it is committed. In justification God grants us actual pardon for past sin, but
virtual pardon for future sin. Edwards, Works, 4:104&mdash;<q>Future sins are respected, in
that first justification, no otherwise than as future faith and repentance are respected
in it; and future faith and repentance are looked upon by him that justifies as virtually
implied in that first repentance and faith, in the same manner that justification from
future sins is implied in that first justification.</q>
</p>

<p>
A man is not justified from his sins before he has committed them, nor is he saved
before he is born. A remarkable illustration of the extreme to which hyper-Calvinism
may go is found in Tobias Crisp, Sermons, 1:358&mdash;<q>The Lord hath no more to lay to the
charge of an elect person, yet in the height of iniquity, and in the excess of riot, and
committing all the abomination that can be committed ... than he has to the charge
of the saint triumphant in glory.</q> A far better statement is found in Moberly, Atonement
and Personality, 61&mdash;<q>As there is upon earth no consummated penitence, so
neither is there any forgiveness consummated.... Forgiveness is the recognition, by
anticipation, of something which is to be, something toward which it is itself a mighty
quickening of possibilities, but something which is not, or at least is not perfectly, yet....
Present forgiveness is inchoate, is educational.... It reaches its final and
perfect consummation only when the forgiven penitent has become at last personally
and completely righteous. If the consummation is not reached but reversed, then forgiveness
is forfeited (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:32-35</hi>).</q> This last exception, however, as we shall see in
our discussion of Perseverance, is only a hypothetical one. The truly forgiven do not
finally fall away.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='868'/><anchor id='Pg868'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>7. Advice to Inquirers demanded by a Scriptural View of Justification.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Where conviction of sin is yet lacking, our aim should be to show
the sinner that he is under God's condemnation for his past sins, and that
no future obedience can ever secure his justification, since this obedience,
even though perfect, could not atone for the past, and even if it could, he
is unable, without God's help, to render it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
With the help of the Holy Spirit, conviction of sin may be roused by presentation of
the claims of God's perfect law, and by drawing attention, first to particular overt
transgressions, and then to the manifold omissions of duty, the general lack of supreme
and all-pervading love to God, and the guilty rejection of Christ's offers and commands.
<q>Even if the next page of the copy book had no blots or erasures, its cleanness would
not alter the smudges and misshapen letters on the earlier pages.</q> God takes no notice
of the promise <q><hi rend='italic'>Have patience with me, and I will pay thee</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:29</hi>), for he knows it can never
be fulfilled.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Where conviction of sin already exists, our aim should be, not, in
the first instance, to secure the performance of external religious duties,
such as prayer, or Scripture-reading, or uniting with the church, but to
induce the sinner, as his first and all-inclusive duty, to accept Christ as his
only and sufficient sacrifice and Savior, and, committing himself and the
matter of his salvation entirely to the hands of Christ, to manifest this trust
and submission by entering at once upon a life of obedience to Christ's
commands.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A convicted sinner should be exhorted, not first to prayer and then to faith, but first
to faith, and then to the immediate expression of that faith in prayer and Christian
activity. He should pray, not <emph>for</emph> faith, but <emph>in</emph> faith. It should not be forgotten that the
sinner never sins against so much light, and never is in so great danger, as when he
is convicted but not converted, when he is moved to turn but yet refuses to turn. No
such sinner should be allowed to think that he has the right to do any other thing whatever
before accepting Christ. This accepting Christ is not an outward act, but an inward
act of mind and heart and will, although believing is naturally evidenced by immediate
outward action. To teach the sinner, however apparently well disposed, how to believe
on Christ, is beyond the power of man. God is the only giver of faith. But Scripture
instances of faith, and illustrations drawn from the child's taking the father at his word
and acting upon it, have often been used by the Holy Spirit as means of leading men
themselves to put faith in Christ.
</p>

<p>
Bengel: <q>Those who are secure Jesus refers to the law; those who are contrite he
consoles with the gospel.</q> A man left work and came home. His wife asked why.
<q>Because I am a sinner.</q> <q>Let me send for the preacher.</q> <q>I am too far gone for
preachers. If the Lord Jesus Christ does not save me I am lost.</q> That man needed
only to be pointed to the Cross. There he found reason for believing that there was
salvation for him. In surrendering himself to Christ he was justified. On the general
subject of Justification, see Edwards, Works, 4:64-132; Buchanan on Justification,
250-411; Owen on Justification, in Works, vol. 5; Bp. of Ossory, Nature and Effects of
Faith, 48-152; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 3:114-212; Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk,
3:133-200; Herzog, Encyclopädie, art.: Rechtfertigung; Bushnell, Vicarious Sacrifice,
416-420, 435.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section III.&mdash;The Application Of Christ's Redemption
In Its Continuation.</head>

<p>
Under this head we treat of Sanctification and of Perseverance. These
two are but the divine and the human sides of the same fact, and they
bear to each other a relation similar to that which exists between
Regeneration and Conversion.
</p>

<pb n='869'/><anchor id='Pg869'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Sanctification.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Definition of Sanctification.</head>

<p>
Sanctification is that continuous operation of the Holy Spirit, by which
the holy disposition imparted in regeneration is maintained and strengthened.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Godet: <q>The work of Jesus in the world is twofold. It is a work accomplished <emph>for
us</emph>, destined to effect <emph>reconciliation</emph> between God and man; it is a work accomplished <emph>in
us</emph>, with the object of effecting our <emph>sanctification</emph>. By the one, a right <emph>relation</emph> is established
between God and us; by the other, the <emph>fruit</emph> of the reëstablished order is secured.
By the former, the condemned sinner is received into the state of grace; by the latter,
the pardoned sinner is associated with the life of God.... How many express themselves
as if, when forgiveness with the peace which it procures has been once obtained,
all is finished and the work of salvation is complete! They seem to have no suspicion
that salvation consists in the health of the soul, and that the health of the soul consists
in holiness. Forgiveness is not the reëstablishment of health; it is the crisis of convalescence.
If God thinks fit to declare the sinner righteous, it is in order that he may
by that means restore him to holiness.</q> O. P. Gifford: <q>The steamship whose machinery
is broken may be brought into port and made fast to the dock. She is <emph>safe</emph>, but not
<emph>sound</emph>. Repairs may last a long time. Christ designs to make us both safe and sound.
Justification gives the first&mdash;safety; sanctification gives the second&mdash;soundness.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bradford, Heredity and Christian Problems, 220&mdash;<q>To be conscious that one is forgiven,
and yet that at the same time he is so polluted that he cannot beget a child without
handing on to that child a nature which will be as bad as if his father had never
been forgiven, is not salvation in any <emph>real</emph> sense.</q> We would say: Is not salvation in
any <emph>complete</emph> sense. Justification needs sanctification to follow it. Man needs God to
continue and preserve his spiritual life, just as much as he needed God to begin it at the
first. Creation in the spiritual, as well as in the natural world, needs to be supplemented
by preservation; see quotation from Jonathan Edwards, in Allen's biography
of him, 371.
</p>

<p>
Regeneration is instantaneous, but sanctification takes time. The <q>developing</q> of
the photographer's picture may illustrate God's process of sanctifying the regenerate
soul. But it is development by new access of truth or light, while the photographer's
picture is usually developed in the dark. This development cannot be accomplished in
a moment. <q>We try in our religious lives to practise instantaneous photography. One
minute for prayer will give us a vision of God, and we think that is enough. Our pictures
are poor because our negatives are weak. We do not give God a long enough
sitting to get a good likeness.</q>
</p>

<p>
Salvation is something past, something present, and something future; a past fact,
justification; a present process, sanctification; a future consummation, redemption
and glory. David, in Ps. 51:1, 2, prays not only that God will blot out his transgressions
(justification), but that God will wash him thoroughly from his iniquity (sanctification).
E. G. Robinson: <q>Sanctification consists <emph>negatively</emph>, in the removal of the penal
consequences of sin from the moral nature; <emph>positively</emph>, in the progressive implanting
and growth of a new principle of life.... The Christian church is a succession of
copies of the character of Christ. Paul never says: <q><hi rend='italic'>be ye imitators of me</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 4:16</hi>), except
when writing to those who had no copies of the New Testament or of the Gospels.</q>
</p>

<p>
Clarke, Christian Theology, 366&mdash;<q>Sanctification does not mean perfection reached,
but the progress of the divine life toward perfection. Sanctification is the Christianizing
of the Christian.</q> It is not simply deliverance from the penalty of sin, but the
development of a divine life that conquers sin. A. A. Hodge, Popular Lectures, 343&mdash;<q>Any
man who thinks he is a Christian, and that he has accepted Christ for justification,
when he did not at the same time accept him for sanctification, is miserably deluded in
that very experience.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This definition implies:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That, although in regeneration the governing disposition of the soul
is made holy, there still remain tendencies to evil which are unsubdued.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 13:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that is bathed needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit</hi> [<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, as a whole]</q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey the lusts thereof</hi></q>&mdash;sin <emph>dwells</emph>
<pb n='870'/><anchor id='Pg870'/>
in a believer, but it <emph>reigns</emph> in an unbeliever (C. H. M.). Subordinate volitions in the
Christian are not always determined in character by the fundamental choice; eddies in
the stream sometimes run counter to the general course of the current.
</p>

<p>
This doctrine is the opposite of that expressed in the phrase: <q>the essential divinity
of the human.</q> Not culture, but crucifixion, is what the Holy Spirit prescribes for the
natural man. There are two natures in the Christian, as Paul shows in <hi rend='italic'>Romans 7</hi>. The
one flourishes at the other's expense. The vine dresser has to cut the rank shoots from
self, that all our force may be thrown into growing fruit. Deadwood must be cut out;
living wood must be cut back (<hi rend='italic'>John 15:2</hi>). Sanctification is not a matter of course, which
will go on whatever we do, or do not do. It requires a direct superintendence and
surgery on the one hand, and, on the other hand a practical hatred of evil on our part
that coöperates with the husbandry of God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the existence in the believer of these two opposing principles
gives rise to a conflict which lasts through life.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 5:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; for these are contrary the one to
the other; that ye may not do the things that ye would</hi></q>&mdash;not, as the A. V. had it, <q><hi rend='italic'>so that ye cannot do the
things that ye would</hi></q>; the Spirit who dwells in believers is represented as enabling them
successfully to resist those tendencies to evil which naturally exist within them; <hi rend='italic'>James 4:5</hi>
(the marginal and better reading)&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>That spirit which he made to dwell in us yearneth for us even unto
jealous envy</hi></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, God's love, like all true love, longs to have its objects wholly for its
own. The Christian is two men in one; but he is to <q><hi rend='italic'>put away the old man</hi></q> and <q><hi rend='italic'>put on the new
man</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:22, 23</hi>). Compare Ecclesiasticus 2:1&mdash;<q>My son, if thou dost set out to serve
the Lord, prepare thy soul for temptation.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 6:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>fight the good fight of the faith</hi></q>&mdash;ἀγωνίζου τὸν καλὸν ἀγῶνα τῆς πίστεως = the beautiful,
honorable, glorious fight; since it has a noble helper, incentive, and reward. It
is the commonest of all struggles, but the issue determines our destiny. An Indian
received as a gift some tobacco in which he found a half dollar hidden. He brought it
back next day, saying that good Indian had fought all night with bad Indian, one telling
him to keep, the other telling him to return.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That in this conflict the Holy Spirit enables the Christian, through
increasing faith, more fully and consciously to appropriate Christ, and thus
progressively to make conquest of the remaining sinfulness of his nature.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:13, 14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>for if ye live after the flesh, ye must die; but if by the Spirit ye put to death the deeds of the body,
ye shall live. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 6:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>but ye were washed,
but ye were sanctified, but ye were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Spirit of our God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>James 1:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If
any man thinketh himself to be religious, while he bridleth not his tongue but deceiveth his heart, this man's
religion is vain</hi></q>&mdash;see Com. of Neander, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>&mdash;<q>That religion is merely imaginary, seeming,
unreal, which allows the continuance of the moral defects originally predominant
in the character.</q> The Christian is <q><hi rend='italic'>crucified with Christ</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 2:20</hi>); but the crucified man
does not die at once. Yet he is as good as dead. Even after the old man is crucified
we are still to mortify him, or put him to death (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:13; Col. 3:5</hi>). We are to cut
down the old rosebush and cultivate only the new shoot that is grafted into it. Here
is our probation as Christians. So <q>die Scene wird zum Tribunal</q>&mdash;the play of life
becomes God's judgment.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Hastings: <q>When Bourdaloue was probing the conscience of Louis XIV, applying
to him the words of St. Paul and intending to paraphrase them: <q><hi rend='italic'>For the good which I
would, I do not, but the evil which I would not, that I do,</hi></q> <q><hi rend='italic'>I find two men in me</hi></q>&mdash;the King interrupted the
great preacher with the memorable exclamation: <q>Ah, these two men, I know them
well!</q> Bourdaloue answered: <q>It is already something to <emph>know</emph> them, Sire; but it is
not enough,&mdash;one of the two must perish.</q></q> And, in the genuine believer, the old does
little by little die, and the new takes its place, as <q><hi rend='italic'>David waxed stronger and stronger, but the house
of Saul waxed weaker and weaker</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>2 Sam. 3:1</hi>). As the Welsh minister found himself after
awhile thinking and dreaming in English, so the language of Canaan becomes to the
Christian his native and only speech.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Explanations and Scripture Proof.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Sanctification is the work of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 5:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the God of peace himself sanctify you wholly.</hi></q> Much of our modern literature
ignores man's dependence upon God, and some of it seems distinctly intended to teach
<pb n='871'/><anchor id='Pg871'/>
the opposite doctrine. Auerbach's <q>On the Heights,</q> for example, teaches that man
can make his own atonement; and <q>The Villa on the Rhine,</q> by the same author,
teaches that man can sanctify himself. The proper inscription for many modern French
novels is: <q>Entertainment here for man and beast.</q> The <hi rend='italic'>Tendenznovelle</hi> of Germany
has its imitators in the sceptical novels of England. And no doctrine in these novels is
so common as the doctrine that man needs no Savior but himself.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It is a continuous process.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>being confident of this very thing, that he who began a good work in you will perfect it until the day
of Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Let us therefore, as many as are perfect, be thus minded: and if in anything ye are otherwise
minded, this also shall God reveal unto you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 3:9, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>lie not one to another; seeing that ye have put off
the old man with his doings, and have put on the new man, that is being renewed unto knowledge after the image of
him that created him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:47</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>those that were being saved</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>unto us who are being
saved</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 2:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in them that are being saved</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 2:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God, who calleth you into his own kingdom
and glory.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
C. H. Parkhurst: <q>The yeast does not strike through the whole lump of dough at a
flash. We keep finding unsuspected lumps of meal that the yeast has not yet seized
upon. We surrender to God in instalments. We may not mean to do it, but we do it.
Conversion has got to be brought down to date.</q> A student asked the President of
Oberlin College whether he could not take a shorter course than the one prescribed.
<q>Oh yes,</q> replied the President, <q>but then it depends on what you want to make of
yourself. When God wants to make an oak, he takes a hundred years, but when he
wants to make a squash, he takes six months.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It is distinguished from regeneration as growth from birth, or as the
strengthening of a holy disposition from the original impartation of it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>speaking the truth in love, may grow up in all things into him, who is the head, even Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1
Thess. 3:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet.
3:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>begotten
again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, through the word of God, which liveth and abideth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 3:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Whosoever
is begotten of God doeth no sin, because his seed abideth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is begotten
of God.</hi></q> Not sin only, but holiness also, is a germ whose nature is to grow. The new
love in the believer's heart follows the law of all life, in developing and extending itself
under God's husbandry. George Eliot: <q>The reward of one duty done is the power to
do another.</q> J. W. A. Stewart: <q>When the 21st of March has come, we say <q>The back
of the winter is broken.</q> There will still be alternations of frost, but the progress will
be towards heat. The coming of summer is sure,&mdash;in germ the summer is already here.</q>
Regeneration is the crisis of a disease; sanctification is the progress of convalescence.
</p>

<p>
Yet growth is not a uniform thing in the tree or in the Christian. In some single
months there is more growth than in all the year besides. During the rest of the year,
however, there is solidification, without which the green timber would be useless. The
period of rapid growth, when woody fibre is actually deposited between the bark and
the trunk, occupies but four to six weeks in May, June, and July. <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 1:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>adding on
your part all diligence, in your faith supply virtue; and in your virtue knowledge</hi></q>&mdash;adding to the central
grace all those that are complementary and subordinate, till they attain the harmony
of a chorus (ἐπιχορηγήσατε).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The operation of God reveals itself in, and is accompanied by, intelligent
and voluntary activity of the believer in the discovery and mortification
of sinful desires, and in the bringing of the whole being into obedience
to Christ and conformity to the standards of his word.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 17:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Sanctify them in the truth: thy word is truth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 10:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>casting down imaginations, and
every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience
of Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God who worketh in you
both to will and to work, for his good pleasure</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 2:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as new-born babes, long for the spiritual milk which
is without guile, that ye may grow thereby unto salvation.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>John 15:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Already ye are clean because of the word
which I have spoken unto you.</hi></q> Regeneration through the word is followed by sanctification
through the word. <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 5:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children.</hi></q> Imitation is at
first a painful effort of will, as in learning the piano; afterwards it becomes pleasurable
and even unconscious. Children unconsciously imitate the handwriting of their parents.
Charles Lamb sees in the mirror, as he is shaving, the apparition of his dead
<pb n='872'/><anchor id='Pg872'/>
father. So our likeness to God comes out as we advance in years. <hi rend='italic'>Col. 3:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>When Christ
who is our life, shall be manifested, then shall ye also with him be manifested in glory.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Horace Bushnell said that, if the stars did not move, they would rot in the sky. The
man who rides the bicycle must either go on, or go off. A large part of sanctification
consists in the formation of proper habits, such as the habit of Scripture reading, of
secret prayer, of church going, of efforts to convert and benefit others. Baxter:
<q>Every man must grow, as trees grow, downward and upward at once. The visible
outward growth must be accompanied by an invisible inward growth.</q> Drummond:
<q>The spiritual man having passed from death to life, the natural man must pass from
life to death.</q> There must be increasing sense of sin: <q>My sins gave sharpness to the
nails, And pointed every thorn.</q> There must be a bringing of new and yet newer
regions of thought, feeling, and action, under the sway of Christ and his truth. There
is a grain of truth even in Macaulay's jest about <q>essentially Christian cookery.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 63, 109-111&mdash;<q>The church is Christian no more
than as it is the organ of the continuous passion of Christ. We must suffer with sinning
and lost humanity, and so <q><hi rend='italic'>fill up ... that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Col. 1:24</hi>).
Christ's crucifixion must be prolonged side by side with his resurrection. There are
three deaths: 1. death in sin, our natural condition; 2. death for sin, our judicial condition;
3. death to sin, our sanctified condition.... As the ascending sap in the tree
crowds off the dead leaves which in spite of storm and frost cling to the branches all
the winter long, so does the Holy Spirit within us, when allowed full sway, subdue and
expel the remnants of our sinful nature.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The agency through which God effects the sanctification of the
believer is the indwelling Spirit of Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 14:17, 18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Spirit of truth ... he abideth with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you desolate;
I come unto you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>15:3-5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Already ye are clean.... Abide in me ... apart from me ye can do nothing</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:9, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. But if any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And
if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the spirit is life because of righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:2, 30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>sanctified
in Christ Jesus ... Christ Jesus, who was made unto us ... sanctification</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>6:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>know ye not
that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye have from God?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 5:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Walk by the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 5:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And be not drunken with wine, wherein is riot, but
be filled with the Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 1:27-29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ
in you, the hope of glory: whom we proclaim, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we
may present every man perfect in Christ; whereunto I labor also, striving according to his working, which worketh in
me mightily</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 1:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>That good thing which was committed unto thee guard through the Holy Spirit which
dwelleth in us.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Christianity substitutes for the old sources of excitement the power of the Holy
Spirit. Here is a source of comfort, energy, and joy, infinitely superior to any which
the sinner knows. God does not leave the soul to fall back upon itself. The higher up
we get in the scale of being, the more does the new life need nursing and tending,&mdash;compare
the sapling and the babe. God gives to the Christian, therefore, an abiding
presence and work of the Holy Spirit,&mdash;not only regeneration, but sanctification. C. E.
Smith, Baptism of Fire: <q>The soul needs the latter as well as the former rain, the
sealing as well as the renewing of the Spirit, the baptism of fire as well as the baptism
of water. Sealing gives something additional to the document, an evidence plainer
than the writing within, both to one's self and to others.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Few flowers yield more honey than serves the bee for its daily food.</q> So we must
first live ourselves off from our spiritual diet; only what is over can be given to nourish
others. Thomas à Kempis, Imitation of Christ: <q>Have peace in thine own heart;
else thou wilt never be able to communicate peace to others.</q> Godet: <q>Man is a vessel
destined to receive God, a vessel which must be enlarged in proportion as it is filled,
and filled in proportion as it is enlarged.</q> Matthew Arnold, Morality: <q>We cannot
kindle when we will The fire which in the heart resides; The Spirit bloweth and is still;
In mystery our soul abides. But tasks in hours of insight willed Can be in hours of
gloom fulfilled. With aching hands and bleeding feet, We dig and heap, lay stone on
stone; We bear the burden and the heat Of the long day, and wish 't were done. Not
till the hours of light return All we have built do we discern.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) The mediate or instrumental cause of sanctification, as of justification,
is faith.
</p>

<pb n='873'/><anchor id='Pg873'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 15:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>cleansing their hearts by faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 1:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For therein is revealed a righteousness of God from
faith unto faith: as it is written, But the righteous shall live from faith.</hi></q> The righteousness includes sanctification
as well as justification; and the subject of the epistle to the Romans is not
simply justification by faith, but rather righteousness by faith, or salvation by faith.
Justification by faith is the subject of <hi rend='italic'>chapters 1-7</hi>; sanctification by faith is the subject of
<hi rend='italic'>chapters 8-16</hi>. We are not sanctified by efforts of our own, any more than we are justified
by efforts of our own.
</p>

<p>
God does not share with us the glory of sanctification, any more than he shares with
us the glory of justification. He must do all, or nothing. William Law: <q>A root set
in the finest soil, in the best climate, and blessed with all that sun and air and rain can
do for it, is not in so sure a way of its growth to perfection, as every man may be whose
spirit aspires after all that which God is ready and infinitely desirous to give him. For
the sun meets not the springing bud that stretches toward him with half that certainty
as God, the source of all good, communicates himself to the soul that longs to partake
of him.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) The object of this faith is Christ himself, as the head of a new
humanity and the source of truth and life to those united to him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 3:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>we all, with unveiled face, beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the
same image from glory to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>till we all attain unto the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a fullgrown man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness
of Christ.</hi></q> Faith here is of course much more than intellectual faith,&mdash;it is the reception
of Christ himself. As Christianity furnishes a new source of life and energy&mdash;in the
Holy Spirit: so it gives a new object of attention and regard&mdash;the Lord Jesus Christ.
As we get air out of a vessel by pouring in water, so we can drive sin out only by bringing
Christ in. See Chalmers' Sermon on The Expulsive Power of a New Affection.
Drummond, Nat. Law in the Spir. World, 123-140&mdash;<q>Man does not grow by making
efforts to grow, but by putting himself into the conditions of growth by living in
Christ.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 John 3:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>every one that hath this hope set on him</hi> (ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ) <hi rend='italic'>purifieth himself, even as he is pure.</hi></q> Sanctification
does not begin from within. The objective Savior must come first. The hope
based on him must give the motive and the standard of self-purification. Likeness
comes from liking. We grow to be like that which we like. Hence we use the phrase
<q>I like,</q> as a synonym for <q>I love.</q> We cannot remove frost from our window by
rubbing the pane; we need to kindle a fire. Growth is not the product of effort, but
of life. <q><hi rend='italic'>Taking thought</hi>,</q> or <q><hi rend='italic'>being anxious</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 6:27</hi>), is not the way to grow. Only take
the hindrances out of the way, and we grow without care, as the tree does. The moon
makes no effort to shine, nor has it any power of its own to shine. It is only a burnt
out cinder in the sky. It shines only as it reflects the light of the sun. So we can shine
<q><hi rend='italic'>as lights in the world</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:15</hi>), only as we reflect Christ, who is <q><hi rend='italic'>the Sun of Righteousness</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mal.
4:2</hi>) and <q><hi rend='italic'>the Light of the world</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 8:12</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>h</hi>) Though the weakest faith perfectly justifies, the degree of sanctification
is measured by the strength of the Christian's faith, and the persistence
with which he apprehends Christ in the various relations which the
Scriptures declare him to sustain to us.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 9:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>According to your faith be it done unto you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 17:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Lord, increase our faith</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 12:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>be
not fashioned according to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove
what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>13:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not
provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>put on the new man, that after God hath been created
in righteousness and holiness of truth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 4:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>exercise thyself unto godliness.</hi></q> Leighton: <q>None of
the children of God are born dumb.</q> Milton: <q>Good, the more communicated, the
more abundant grows.</q> Faith can neither be stationary nor complete (Westcott, Bible
Com. on <hi rend='italic'>John 15:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>so shall ye become my disciples</hi></q>). Luther: <q>He who <emph>is</emph> a Christian is <emph>no</emph>
Christian</q>; <q>Christianus non in esse, sed in fieri.</q> In a Bible that belonged to Oliver
Cromwell is this inscription: <q>O. C. 1644. Qui cessat esse melior cessat esse bonus</q>&mdash;<q>He
who ceases to be better ceases to be good.</q> Story, the sculptor, when asked which
of his works he valued most, replied: <q>My next.</q> The greatest work of the Holy Spirit
is the perfecting of Christian character.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Col. 1:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Increasing by the knowledge of God</hi></q>&mdash;here the instrumental dative represents the
knowledge of God as the dew or rain which nurtures the growth of the plant (Lightfoot).
<pb n='874'/><anchor id='Pg874'/>
Mr. Gladstone had the habit of reading the Bible every Sunday afternoon to old
women on his estate. Tholuck: <q>I have but one passion, and that is Christ.</q> This is
an echo of Paul's words: <q><hi rend='italic'>to me to live is Christ</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:21</hi>). But Paul is far from thinking
that he has already obtained, or is already made perfect. He prays <q><hi rend='italic'>that I may gain Christ, ... that
I may know him</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:8, 10</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>i</hi>) From the lack of persistence in using the means appointed for
Christian growth&mdash;such as the word of God, prayer, association with other
believers, and personal effort for the conversion of the ungodly&mdash;sanctification
does not always proceed in regular and unbroken course, and it is
never completed in this life.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Not that I have already obtained, or am already made perfect: but I press on, if so be that I may lay
hold on that for which also I was laid hold on by Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 1:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.</hi></q> Carlyle, in his Life of John Sterling, chap. 8, says of
Coleridge, that <q>whenever natural obligation or voluntary undertaking made it his
duty to do anything, the fact seemed a sufficient reason for his <emph>not</emph> doing it.</q> A regular,
advancing sanctification is marked, on the other hand, by a growing habit of instant
and joyful obedience. The intermittent spring depends upon the reservoir in the mountain
cave,&mdash;only when the rain fills the latter full, does the spring begin to flow. So to
secure unbroken Christian activity, there must be constant reception of the word and
Spirit of God.
</p>

<p>
Galen: <q>If diseases take hold of the body, there is nothing so certain to drive them
out as diligent exercise.</q> Williams, Principles of Medicine: <q>Want of exercise and
sedentary habits not only predispose to, but actually cause, disease.</q> The little girl
who fell out of bed at night was asked how it happened. She replied that she went to
sleep too near where she got in. Some Christians lose the joy of their religion by ceasing
their Christian activities too soon after conversion. Yet others cultivate their
spiritual lives from mere selfishness. Selfishness follows the line of least resistance. It
is easier to pray in public and to attend meetings for prayer, than it is to go out into
the unsympathetic world and engage in the work of winning souls. This is the fault of
monasticism. Those grow most who forget themselves in their work for others. The
discipline of life is ordained in God's providence to correct tendencies to indolence.
Even this discipline is often received in a rebellious spirit. The result is delay in the
process of sanctification. Bengel: <q>Deus habet horas et moras</q>&mdash;<q>God has his hours
and his delays.</q> German proverb: <q>Gut Ding will Weile haben</q>&mdash;<q>A good thing
requires time.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>j</hi>) Sanctification, both of the soul and of the body of the believer, is
completed in the life to come,&mdash;that of the former at death, that of the
latter at the resurrection.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be conformed to the body of his glory,
according to the working whereby he is able even to subject all things unto himself</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 3:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>When Christ, who is
our life, shall be manifested, then shall we also with him be manifested in glory</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 12:14, 23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Follow after peace
with all men, and the sanctification without which no man shall see the Lord ... spirits of just men made perfect</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>1 John 3:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Beloved, now are we children of God, and it is not yet made manifest what we shall be. We know that,
if he shall be manifested, we shall be like him; for we shall see him even as he is</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jude 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>able to guard you from
stumbling, and to set you before the presence of his glory without blemish in exceeding joy</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 14:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And in
their mouth was found no lie: they are without blemish.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 121, puts the completion of our sanctification,
not at death, but at the appearing of the Lord <q><hi rend='italic'>a second time, apart from sin, ... unto salvation</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 9:28; 1 Thess. 3:13; 5:23</hi>). When we shall see him as he is, instantaneous photographing
of his image in our souls will take the place of the present slow progress from glory
to glory (<hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 3:18; 1 John 3:2</hi>). If by sanctification we mean, not a sloughing off of
remaining depravity, but an ever increasing purity and perfection, then we may hold
that the process of sanctification goes on forever. Our relation to Christ must always
be that of the imperfect to the perfect, of the finite to the infinite; and for finite spirits,
progress must always be possible. Clarke, Christian Theology, 373&mdash;<q>Not even at death
can sanctification end.... The goal lies far beyond deliverance from sin.... There
is no such thing as bringing the divine life to such completion that no further progress
is possible to it.... Indeed, free and unhampered progress can scarcely begin until
<pb n='875'/><anchor id='Pg875'/>
sin is left behind.</q> <q>O snows so pure, O peaks so high! I shall not reach you till I die!</q>
</p>

<p>
As Jesus' resurrection was prepared by holiness of life, so the Christian's resurrection
is prepared by sanctification. When our souls are freed from the last remains of sin,
then it will not be possible for us to be holden by death (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:24</hi>). See Gordon, The
Twofold Life, or Christ's Work for us and in us; Brit. and For. Evang. Rev., April,
1884:205-229; Van Oosterzee, Christian Dogmatics, 657-662.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Erroneous Views refuted by these Scripture Passages.</head>

<p>
A. The Antinomian,&mdash;which holds that, since Christ's obedience and
sufferings have satisfied the demands of the law, the believer is free from
obligation to observe it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Antinomian view rests upon a misinterpretation of <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Ye are not under law,
but under grace.</hi></q> Agricola and Amsdorf (1559) were representatives of this view. Amsdorf
said that <q>good works are hurtful to salvation.</q> But Melanchthon's words furnish
the reply: <q>Sola fides justificat, sed fides non est sola.</q> F. W. Robertson states
it: <q>Faith alone justifies, but not the faith that is alone.</q> And he illustrates: <q>Lightning
alone strikes, but not the lightning which is without thunder; for that is summer
lightning and harmless.</q> See Browning's poem, Johannes Agricola in Meditation, in
Dramatis Personæ, 300&mdash;<q>I have God's warrant, Could I blend All hideous sins as in
a cup, To drink the mingled venoms up, Secure my nature will convert The draught
to blossoming gladness.</q> Agricola said that Moses ought to be hanged. This is Sanctification
without Perseverance.
</p>

<p>
Sandeman, the founder of the sect called Sandemanians, asserted as his fundamental
principle the deadliness of all doings, the necessity for inactivity to let God do his work
in the soul. See his essay, Theron and Aspasia, referred to by Allen, in his Life of
Jonathan Edwards, 114. Anne Hutchinson was excommunicated and banished by the
Puritans from Massachusetts, in 1637, for holding <q>two dangerous errors: 1. The Holy
Spirit personally dwells in a justified person; 2. No sanctification can evidence to us
our justification.</q> Here the latter error almost destroyed the influence of the former
truth. There is a little Antinomianism in the popular hymn: <q>Lay your deadly doings
down, Down at Jesus' feet; Doing is a deadly thing; Doing ends in death.</q> The
colored preacher's poetry only presented the doctrine in the concrete: <q>You may rip
and te-yar, You may cuss and swe-yar, But you're jess as sure of heaven, 'S if you'd
done gone de-yar.</q> Plain Andrew Fuller in England (1754-1815) did excellent service
in overthrowing popular Antinomianism.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
To this view we urge the following objections:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That since the law is a transcript of the holiness of God, its demands
as a moral rule are unchanging. Only as a system of penalty and a method
of salvation is the law abolished in Christ's death.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 5:17-19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Think not that I came to destroy the law or the prophets: I came not to destroy, but to fulfil. For
verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass away, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass away from the law,
till all things be accomplished. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men
so, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, he shall be called great in
the kingdom of heaven</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>48</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Ye
shall be holy; for I am holy</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 10:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For Christ is the end of the law unto righteousness to every one that
believeth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 2:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I have been crucified with Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law,
having become a curse for us</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>having blotted out the bond written in ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us: and he hath taken it out of the way, nailing it to the cross</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 2:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>deliver all
them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the union between Christ and the believer secures not only
the bearing of the penalty of the law by Christ, but also the impartation
of Christ's spirit of obedience to the believer,&mdash;in other words, brings
him into communion with Christ's work, and leads him to ratify it in his
own experience.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:9, 10, 15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. But if
any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin; but
<pb n='876'/><anchor id='Pg876'/>
the spirit is life because of righteousness.... For ye received not the spirit of bondage again unto fear: but ye
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 5:22-25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, self-control; against such there is no law. And they
that are of Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with the passions and the lusts thereof</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 1:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If we say that
we have fellowship with him and walk in the darkness, we lie, and do not the truth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Whosoever abideth in
him sinneth not: whosoever sinneth hath not seen him, neither knoweth him.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That the freedom from the law of which the Scriptures speak, is
therefore simply that freedom from the constraint and bondage of the law,
which characterizes those who have become one with Christ by faith.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 119:97</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 3:8, 31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and why not (as we are
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say), Let us do evil, that good may come? whose condemnation is
just.... Do we then make the law of none effect through faith? God forbid: nay, we establish the law</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>6:14, 15,
22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under law, but under grace. What then? shall we
sin, because we are not under law, but under grace? God forbid ... now being made free from sin and become
servants to God, ye have your fruit unto sanctification, and the end eternal life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>7:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But now we have been discharged
from the law, having died to that wherein we were held; so that we serve in newness of the spirit, and not in
oldness of the letter</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>8:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that the ordinance of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 7:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that was called in the Lord being a bondservant, is the Lord's freedman</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 5:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For freedom did Christ set us free: stand fast therefore, and be not entangled again in a yoke of bondage</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 1:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and unruly</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>James 1:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the
perfect law, the law of liberty</hi>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
To sum up the doctrine of Christian freedom as opposed to Antinomianism,
we may say that Christ does not free us, as the Antinomian believes,
from the law as a rule of life. But he does free us (1) from the law as a
system of curse and penalty; this he does by bearing the curse and penalty
himself. Christ frees us (2) from the law with its claims as a method of
salvation; this he does by making his obedience and merits ours. Christ
frees us (3) from the law as an outward and foreign compulsion; this he
does by giving to us the spirit of obedience and sonship, by which the
law is progressively realized within.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Christ, then, does not free us, as the Antinomian believes, from the law as a rule of
life. But he does free us (1) from the law as a system of curse and penalty. This he
does by bearing the curse and penalty himself. Just as law can do nothing with a man
after it has executed its death-penalty upon him, so law can do nothing with us, now
that its death-penalty has been executed upon Christ. There are some insects that
expire in the act of planting their sting; and so, when the law gathered itself up and
planted its sting in the heart of Christ, it expended all its power as a judge and avenger
over us who believe. In the Cross, the law as a system of curse and penalty exhausted
itself; so we were set free.
</p>

<p>
Christ frees us (2) from the law with its claims as a method of salvation: in other
words, he frees us from the necessity of trusting our salvation to an impossible future
obedience. As the sufferings of Christ, apart from any sufferings of ours, deliver us
from eternal death, so the merits of Christ, apart from any merits of ours, give us a
title to eternal life. By faith in what Christ has done and simple acceptance of his
work for us, we secure a right to heaven. Obedience on our part is no longer rendered
painfully, as if our salvation depended on it, but freely and gladly, in gratitude for
what Christ has done for us. Illustrate by the English nobleman's invitation to his
park, and the regulations he causes to be posted up.
</p>

<p>
Christ frees us (3) from the law as an outward and foreign compulsion. In putting
an end to legalism, he provides against license. This he does by giving the spirit of
obedience and sonship. He puts love in the place of fear; and this secures an obedience
more intelligent, more thorough, and more hearty, than could have been secured
by mere law. So he frees us from the burden and compulsion of the law, by realizing
the law within us by his Spirit. The freedom of the Christian is freedom <emph>in</emph> the law,
such as the musician experiences when the scales and exercises have become easy, and
work has turned to play. See John Owen, Works, 3:366-651; 6:1-313; Campbell, The
Indwelling Christ, 73-81.
</p>

<pb n='877'/><anchor id='Pg877'/>

<p>
Gould, Bib. Theol. N. T., 195&mdash;<q>The supremacy of those books which contain the
words of Jesus himself [<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, the Synoptic Gospels] is that they incorporate, with the
other elements of the religious life, the regulative will. Here for instance [in John]
is the gospel of the contemplative life, which, <q><hi rend='italic'>beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord is
changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 3:18</hi>). The belief is that,
with this beholding, life will take care of itself. Life will never take care of itself.
Among other things, after the most perfect vision, it has to ask what aspirations, principles,
affections, belong to life, and then to cultivate the will to embody these things.
Here is the common defect of all religions. They fail to marry religion to the common
life. Christ did not stop short of this final word; but if we leave him for even the greatest
of his disciples, we are in danger of missing it.</q> This utterance of Gould is surprising
in several ways. It attributes to John alone the contemplative attitude of
mind, which the quotation given shows to belong also to Paul. It ignores the constant
appeals in John to the will: <q><hi rend='italic'>He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>John 14:21</hi>). It also forgets that <q><emph>life</emph></q> in John is the whole being, including intellect,
affection, and will, and that to have Christ for one's life is absolutely to exclude Antinomianism.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The Perfectionist,&mdash;which holds that the Christian may, in this
life, become perfectly free from sin. This view was held by John Wesley
in England, and by Mahan and Finney in America.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Finney, Syst. Theol., 500, declares regeneration to be <q>an instantaneous change from
entire sinfulness to entire holiness.</q> The claims of Perfectionists, however, have been
modified from <q>freedom from all sin,</q> to <q>freedom from all known sin,</q> then to
<q>entire consecration,</q> and finally to <q>Christian assurance.</q> H. W. Webb-Peploe, in
S. S. Times, June 25, 1898&mdash;<q>The Keswick teaching is that no true Christian need wilfully
or knowingly sin. Yet this is not sinless perfection. It is simply according to
our faith that we receive, and faith only draws from God according to our present
possibilities. These are limited by the presence of indwelling corruption; and, while
never needing to sin within the sphere of the light we possess, there are to the last
hour of our life upon the earth powers of corruption within every man, which defile
his best deeds and give to even his holiest efforts that <q>nature of sin</q> of which the 9th
Article in the Church of England Prayerbook speaks so strongly.</q> Yet it is evident
that this corruption is not regarded as real sin, and is called <q>nature of sin</q> only in
some non-natural sense.
</p>

<p>
Dr. George Peck says: <q>In the life of the most perfect Christian there is every day
renewed occasion for self-abhorrence, for repentance, for renewed application of the
blood of Christ, for application of the rekindling of the Holy Spirit.</q> But why call
this a state of perfection? F. B. Meyer: <q>We never say that self is dead; were we to
do so, self would be laughing at us round the corner. The teaching of <hi rend='italic'>Romans 6</hi> is,
not that self is dead, but that the renewed will is dead to self, the man's will saying Yes
to Christ, and No to self; through the Spirit's grace it constantly repudiates and mortifies
the power of the flesh.</q> For statements of the Perfectionist view, see John Wesley's
Christian Theology, edited by Thornley Smith, 265-273; Mahan, Christian Perfection,
and art. in Bib. Repos. 2d Series, vol. IV, Oct. 1840:408-428; Finney, Systematic Theology,
586-766; Peck, Christian Perfection; Ritschl, Bib. Sac., Oct. 1878:656; A. T. Pierson,
The Keswick Movement.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In reply, it will be sufficient to observe:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That the theory rests upon false conceptions: first, of the law,&mdash;as
a sliding-scale of requirement graduated to the moral condition of creatures,
instead of being the unchangeable reflection of God's holiness; secondly,
of sin,&mdash;as consisting only in voluntary acts instead of embracing also those
dispositions and states of the soul which are not conformed to the divine
holiness; thirdly, of the human will,&mdash;as able to choose God supremely
and persistently at every moment of life, and to fulfil at every moment the
obligations resting upon it, instead of being corrupted and enslaved by the
Fall.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This view reduces the debt to the debtor's ability to pay,&mdash;a short and easy method
of discharging obligations. I can leap over a church steeple, if I am only permitted to
<pb n='878'/><anchor id='Pg878'/>
make the church steeple low enough; and I can touch the stars, if the stars will only
come down to my hand. The Philistines are quite equal to Samson, if they may only
cut off Samson's locks. So I can obey God's law, if I may only make God's law what
I want it to be. The fundamental error of perfectionism is its low view of God's law;
the second is its narrow conception of sin. John Wesley: <q>I believe a person filled with
love of God is still liable to involuntary transgressions. Such transgressions you may
call sins, if you please; I do not.</q> The third error of perfectionism is its exaggerated
estimate of man's power of contrary choice. To say that, whatever may have been
the habits of the past and whatever may be the evil affections of the present, a man is
perfectly able at any moment to obey the whole law of God, is to deny that there are
such things as character and depravity. Finney, Gospel Themes, 383, indeed, disclaimed
<q>all expectations of attaining this state ourselves, and by our own independent,
unaided efforts.</q> On the Law of God, see pages 537-544.
</p>

<p>
Augustine: <q>Every lesser good has an essential element of sin.</q> Anything less
than the perfection that belongs normally to my present stage of development is a
coming short of the law's demand. R. W. Dale, Fellowship with Christ, 359&mdash;<q>For us
and in this world, the divine is always the impossible. Give me a law for individual
conduct which requires a perfection that is within my reach, and I am sure that the
law does not represent the divine thought. <q><hi rend='italic'>Not that I have already obtained, or am already made
perfect: but I press on, if so be that I may lay hold on that for which also I was laid hold on by Christ Jesus</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Phil.
3:12</hi>)&mdash;this, from the beginning, has been the confession of saints.</q> The Perfectionist
is apt to say that we must <q>take Christ twice, once for justification and once for sanctification.</q>
But no one can take Christ for justification without at the same time
taking him for sanctification. Dr. A. A. Hodge calls this doctrine <q>Neonomianism,</q>
because it holds not to one unchanging, ideal, and perfect law of God, but to a second
law given to human weakness when the first law has failed to secure obedience.
</p>

<p>
(1) The law of God demands perfection. It is a transcript of God's nature. Its object
is to reveal God. Anything less than the demand of perfection would misrepresent
God. God could not give a law which a sinner could obey. In the very nature of the
case there can be no sinlessness in this life for those who have once sinned. Sin brings
incapacity as well as guilt. All men have squandered a part of the talent intrusted to
them by God, and therefore no man can come up to the demands of that law which
requires all that God gave to humanity at its creation together with interest on the
investment. (2) Even the best Christian comes short of perfection. Regeneration
makes only the dominant disposition holy. Many affections still remain unholy and
require to be cleansed. Only by lowering the demands of the law, making shallow
our conceptions of sin, and mistaking temporary volition for permanent bent of the
will, can we count ourselves to be perfect. (3) Absolute perfection is attained not in
this world but in the world to come. The best Christians count themselves still sinners,
strive most earnestly for holiness, have imputed but not inherent sanctification,
are saved by hope.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the theory finds no support in, but rather is distinctly contradicted
by, Scripture.
</p>

<p>
First, the Scriptures never assert or imply that the Christian may in this
life live without sin; passages like 1 John 3:6, 9, if interpreted consistently
with the context, set forth either the ideal standard of Christian
living or the actual state of the believer so far as respects his new nature.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 John 3:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not; whosoever sinneth hath not seen him, neither knoweth him</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Whosoever is begotten of God doeth no sin, because his seed abideth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is
begotten of God.</hi></q> Ann. Par. Bible, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>:&mdash;<q>John is contrasting the states in which sin
and grace severally predominate, without reference to degrees in either, showing that
all men are in one or the other.</q> Neander: <q>John recognizes no intermediate state, no
gradations. He seizes upon the radical point of difference. He contrasts the two states
in their essential nature and principle. It is either love or hate, light or darkness, truth
or a lie. The Christian life in its essential nature is the opposite of all sin. If there be
sin, it must be the afterworking of the old nature.</q> Yet all Christians are required in
Scripture to advance, to confess sin, to ask forgiveness, to maintain warfare, to assume
the attitude of ill desert in prayer, to receive chastisement for the removal of imperfections,
to regard full salvation as matter of hope, not of present experience.
</p>

<pb n='879'/><anchor id='Pg879'/>

<p>
John paints only in black and white; there are no intermediate tints or colors. Take
the words in <hi rend='italic'>1 John 3:6</hi> literally, and there never was and never can be a regenerate person.
The words are hyperbolical, as Paul's words in <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We who died to sin, how shall
we any longer live therein</hi></q>&mdash;are metaphorical; see E. H. Johnson, in Bib. Sac., 1892:375, note.
The Emperor William refused the request for an audience prepared by a German-American,
saying that Germans born in Germany but naturalized in America became
Americans: <q>Ich kenne Amerikaner, Ich kenne Deutsche, aber Deutsch-Amerikaner
kenne Ich nicht</q>&mdash;<q>I know Americans, I know Germans, but German-Americans I do
not know.</q>
</p>

<p>
Lowrie, Doctrine of St. John, 110&mdash;<q>St. John uses the noun <emph>sin</emph> and the verb <emph>to sin</emph> in
two senses: to denote the power or principle of sin, or to denote concrete acts of sin.
The latter sense he generally expresses by the plural <emph>sins</emph>.... The Christian is guilty
of particular acts of sin for which confession and forgiveness are required, but as he
has been freed from the bondage of sin he cannot habitually practise it nor abide in it,
still less can he be guilty of sin in its superlative form, by denial of Christ.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Secondly, the apostolic admonitions to the Christians and Hebrews show
that no such state of complete sanctification had been generally attained by
the Christians of the first century.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For in hope were we saved: but hope that is seen is not hope: for who hopeth for that which he seeth?</hi></q>
The party feeling, selfishness, and immorality found among the members of the Corinthian
church are evidence that they were far from a state of entire sanctification.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thirdly, there is express record of sin committed by the most perfect
characters of Scripture&mdash;as Noah, Abraham, Job, David, Peter.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We are urged by perfectionists <q>to keep up the standard.</q> We do this, not by calling
certain men perfect, but by calling Jesus Christ perfect. In proportion to our sanctification,
we are absorbed in Christ, not in ourselves. Self-consciousness and display
are a poor evidence of sanctification. The best characters of Scripture put their trust
in a standard higher than they have ever realized in their own persons, even in the
righteousness of God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Fourthly, the word τέλειος, as applied to spiritual conditions already
attained, can fairly be held to signify only a relative perfection, equivalent
to sincere piety or maturity of Christian judgment.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 2:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We speak wisdom, however, among the perfect,</hi></q> or, as the Am. Revisers have it, <q><hi rend='italic'>among
them that are fullgrown</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Let us therefore, as many as are perfect, be thus minded.</hi></q> Men are often
called perfect, when free from any fault which strikes the eyes of the world. See <hi rend='italic'>Gen.
6:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Noah was a righteous man, and perfect</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Job 1:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that man was perfect and upright.</hi></q> On τέλειος, see
Trench, Syn. N. T., 1:110.
</p>

<p>
The τέλειοι are described in <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Solid food is for the mature</hi> (τελείων) <hi rend='italic'>who on account of habit
have their perceptions disciplined for the discriminating of good and evil</hi></q> (Dr. Kendrick's translation).
The same word <q><emph>perfect</emph></q> is used of Jacob in <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 25:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Jacob was a quiet man, dwelling in tents</hi></q> =
a harmless man, exemplary and well-balanced, as a man of business. Genung, Epic of
the Inner Life, 132&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>'Perfect'</hi> in Job = Horace's <q>integer vitæ,</q> being the adjective of
which <q>integrity</q> is the substantive.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Fifthly, the Scriptures distinctly deny that any man on earth lives without
sin.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 K. 8:46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>there is no man that sinneth not</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eccl. 7:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Surely there is not a righteous man upon earth, that
doeth good, and sinneth not</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>James 3:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For in many things we all stumble. If any stumbleth not in word, the
same is a perfect man, able to bridle the whole body also</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 1:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
T. T. Eaton, Sanctification: <q>1. Some mistake regeneration for sanctification. They
have been unconverted church members. When led to faith in Christ, and finding
peace and joy, they think they are sanctified, when they are simply converted. 2. Some
mistake assurance of faith for sanctification. But joy is not sanctification. 3. Some
mistake the baptism of the Holy Spirit for sanctification. But Peter sinned grievously
at Antioch, after he had received that baptism. 4. Some think that doing the best one
can is sanctification. But he who measures by inches, for feet, can measure up well.
<pb n='880'/><anchor id='Pg880'/>
Some regard sin as only a voluntary act, whereas the sinful nature is the fountain.
Stripping off the leaves of the Upas tree does not answer. 6. Some mistake the power
of the human will, and fancy that an act of will can free a man from sin. They ignore
the settled bent of the will, which the act of will does not change.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Sixthly, the declaration: <q>ye were sanctified</q> (1 Cor. 6:11), and the
designation: <q>saints</q> (1 Cor. 1:2), applied to early believers, are, as the
whole epistle shows, expressive of a holiness existing in germ and anticipation;
the expressions deriving their meaning not so much from what these
early believers were, as from what Christ was, to whom they were united
by faith.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
When N. T. believers are said to be <q><emph>sanctified</emph>,</q> we must remember the O. T. use of the
word. <q>Sanctify</q> may have either the meaning <q>to make holy outwardly,</q> or <q>to make
holy inwardly.</q> The people of Israel and the vessels of the tabernacle were made holy
in the former sense; their sanctification was a setting apart to the sacred use. <hi rend='italic'>Num. 8:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>all
the firstborn among the children of Israel are mine.... I sanctified them for myself</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Deut. 33:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Yea, he
loveth the people; all his saints are in thy hand</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Chron. 29:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>all the vessels ... have we prepared and
sanctified.</hi></q> The vessels mentioned were first immersed, and then sprinkled from day to
day according to need. So the Christian by his regeneration is set apart for God's service,
and in this sense is a <q><emph>saint</emph></q> and <q><emph>sanctified</emph>.</q> More than this, he has in him the beginnings
of purity,&mdash;he is <q><hi rend='italic'>clean as a whole</hi>,</q> though he yet needs <q><hi rend='italic'>to wash his feet</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 13:10</hi>)&mdash;that is,
to be cleansed from the recurring defilements of his daily life. Shedd, Dogm. Theol.,
2:551&mdash;<q>The error of the Perfectionist is that of confounding <emph>imputed</emph> sanctification
with <emph>inherent</emph> sanctification. It is the latter which is mentioned in <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Christ Jesus,
who was made unto us ... sanctification.</hi></q></q>
</p>

<p>
Water from the Jordan is turbid, but it settles in the bottle and seems pure&mdash;until it
is shaken. Some Christians seem very free from sin, until you shake them,&mdash;then they
get <q>riled.</q> Clarke, Christian Theology, 871&mdash;<q>Is there not a higher Christian life?
Yes, and a higher life beyond it, and a higher still beyond. The Christian life is ever
higher and higher. It must pass through all stages between its beginning and its perfection.</q>
C. D. Case: <q>The great objection to [this theory of] complete sanctification
is that, if possessed at all, it is not a development of our own character.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That the theory is disapproved by the testimony of Christian experience.&mdash;In
exact proportion to the soul's advance in holiness does it shrink
from claiming that holiness has been already attained, and humble itself
before God for its remaining apathy, ingratitude, and unbelief.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:12-14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Not that I have already obtained, or am already made perfect: but I press on, if so be that I may
lay hold on that for which also I was laid hold on by Christ Jesus.</hi></q> Some of the greatest advocates of
perfectionism have been furthest from claiming any such perfection; although many
of their less instructed followers claimed it for them, and even professed to have
attained it themselves.
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>Luke 7:1-10</hi>, the centurion does not think himself worthy to go to Jesus, or to have
him come under his roof, yet the elders of the Jews say: <q><hi rend='italic'>He is worthy that thou shouldest do
this</hi></q>; and Jesus himself says of him: <q><hi rend='italic'>I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel</hi>.</q> <q><hi rend='italic'>Holy to Jehovah</hi></q>
was inscribed upon the mitre of the high priest (<hi rend='italic'>Ex. 28:36</hi>). Others saw it, but he
saw it not. Moses knew not that his face shone (<hi rend='italic'>Ex. 34:29</hi>). The truest holiness is that
of which the possessor is least conscious; yet it is his real diadem and beauty (A. J.
Gordon). <q>The nearer men are to being sinless, the less they talk about it</q> (Dwight
L. Moody). <q>Always strive for perfection: never believe you have reached it</q> (Arnold
of Rugby). Compare with this, Ernest Renan's declaration that he had nothing to alter
in his life. <q>I have not sinned for some time,</q> said a woman to Mr. Spurgeon. <q>Then
you must be very proud of it,</q> he replied. <q>Indeed I am!</q> said she. A pastor says:
<q>No one can attain the <q>Higher Life,</q> and escape making mischief.</q> John Wesley
lamented that not one in thirty retained the blessing.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Perfectionism is best met by proper statements of the nature of the law
and of sin (Ps. 119:96). While we thus rebuke spiritual pride, however,
we should be equally careful to point out the inseparable connection between
justification and sanctification, and their equal importance as together making
<pb n='881'/><anchor id='Pg881'/>
up the Biblical idea of salvation. While we show no favor to those who
would make sanctification a sudden and paroxysmal act of the human will,
we should hold forth the holiness of God as the standard of attainment, and
the faith in a Christ of infinite fulness as the medium through which that
standard is to be gradually but certainly realized in us (2 Cor. 3:18).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We should imitate Lyman Beecher's method of opposing perfectionism&mdash;by searching
expositions of God's law. When men know what the law is, they will say with the
Psalmist: <q><hi rend='italic'>I have seen an end of all perfection; thy commandment is exceeding broad</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 119:96</hi>). And yet
we are earnestly and hopefully to seek in Christ for a continually increasing measure
of sanctification: <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Christ Jesus, who was made unto us ... sanctification</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 3:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But
we all, with unveiled face beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image
from glory to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit</hi>.</q> Arnold of Rugby: <q>Always expect to succeed,
and never think you have succeeded.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mr. Finney meant by entire sanctification only that it is possible for Christians in this
life by the grace of God to consecrate themselves so unreservedly to his service as to
live without conscious and wilful disobedience to the divine commands. He did not
claim himself to have reached this point; he made at times very impressive confessions
of his own sinfulness; he did not encourage others to make for themselves the claim to
have lived without conscious fault. He held however that such a state is attainable,
and therefore that its pursuit is rational. He also admitted that such a state is one, not
of absolute, but only of relative, sinlessness. His error was in calling it a state of entire
sanctification. See A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 377-384.
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 116&mdash;<q>It is possible that one may experience a
great crisis in his spiritual life, in which there is such a total surrender of self to God
and such an infilling of the Holy Spirit, that he is freed from the bondage of sinful
appetites and habits, and enabled to have constant victory over self instead of suffering
constant defeat.... If the doctrine of sinless perfection is a heresy, the doctrine of
contentment with sinful imperfection is a greater heresy.... It is not an edifying
spectacle to see a Christian worldling throwing stones at a Christian perfectionist.</q>
Caird, Evolution of Religion, 1:138&mdash;<q>If, according to the German proverb, it is provided
that the trees shall not grow into the sky, it is equally provided that they shall
always grow toward it; and the sinking of the roots into the soil is inevitably accompanied
by a further expansion of the branches.</q>
</p>

<p>
See Hovey, Doctrine of the Higher Christian Life, Compared with Scripture, also
Hovey, Higher Christian Life Examined, in Studies in Ethics and Theology, 344-427;
Snodgrass, Scriptural Doctrine of Sanctification; Princeton Essays, 1:335-365; Hodge,
Syst. Theol., 3:213-258; Calvin, Institutes, III, 11:6; Bib. Repos., 2d Series, 1:44-58;
2:143-166; Woods, Works, 4:465-523; H. A. Boardman, The <q>Higher Life</q> Doctrine of
Sanctification; William Law, Practical Treatise on Christian Perfection; E. H. Johnson,
The Highest Life.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Perseverance.</head>

<p>
The Scriptures declare that, in virtue of the original purpose and continuous
operation of God, all who are united to Christ by faith will infallibly
continue in a state of grace and will finally attain to everlasting life. This
voluntary continuance, on the part of the Christian, in faith and well-doing
we call perseverance. Perseverance is, therefore, the human side or aspect
of that spiritual process which, as viewed from the divine side, we call sanctification.
It is not a mere natural consequence of conversion, but involves
a constant activity of the human will from the moment of conversion to the
end of life.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Adam's holiness was mutable; God did not determine to keep him. It is otherwise
with believers in Christ; God has determined to give them the kingdom (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:32</hi>).
Yet this keeping by God, which we call sanctification, is accompanied and followed by a
keeping of himself on the part of the believer, which we call perseverance. The former
is alluded to in <hi rend='italic'>John 17:11, 12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>keep them in thy name.... I kept them in thy name.... I guarded them,
and not one of them perished, but the son of perdition</hi></q>; the latter is alluded to in <hi rend='italic'>1 John 5:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that was
<pb n='882'/><anchor id='Pg882'/>
begotten of God keepeth himself.</hi></q> Both are expressed in <hi rend='italic'>Jude 21, 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Keep yourselves in the love of God....
Now unto him that is able to guard you from stumbling...</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
A German treatise on Pastoral Theology is entitled: <q>Keep What Thou Hast</q>&mdash;an
allusion to <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 1:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>That good thing which was committed unto thee guard through the Holy Spirit which
dwelleth in us.</hi></q> Not only the pastor, but every believer, has a charge to keep; and the
keeping of ourselves is as important a point of Christian doctrine as is the keeping of
God. Both are expressed in the motto: <foreign rend='italic'>Teneo, Teneor</foreign>&mdash;the motto on the front of the
Y. M. C. A. building in Boston, underneath a stone cross, firmly clasped by two hands.
The colored preacher said that <q>Perseverance means: 1. Take hold; 2. Hold on; 3.
Never let go.</q>
</p>

<p>
Physically, intellectually, morally, spiritually, there is need that we persevere. Paul,
in <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 9:27</hi>, declares that he smites his body under the eye and makes a slave of it, lest
after having preached to others he himself should be rejected; and in <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 4:7</hi>, at the
end of his career, he rejoices that he has <q><hi rend='italic'>kept the faith</hi>.</q> A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the
Spirit, 115&mdash;<q>The Christian is as <q><hi rend='italic'>a tree planted by the streams of water, that bringeth forth its fruit in its
season</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 1:3</hi>), but to conclude that his growth will be as irresistible as that of the tree,
coming as a matter of course simply because he has by regeneration been planted in
Christ, is a grave mistake. The disciple is required to be consciously and intelligently
active in his own growth, as the tree is not, <q><hi rend='italic'>to give all diligence to make his calling and election sure</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 1:10</hi>) by surrendering himself to the divine action.</q> Clarke, Christian Theology,
379&mdash;<q>Man is able to fall, and God is able to keep him from falling; and through the
various experiences of life God will so save his child out of all evil that he will be
morally incapable of falling.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Proof of the Doctrine of Perseverance.</head>

<p>
A. From Scripture.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 10:28, 29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they shall never perish, and no one shall snatch them out of my hand. My Father, who hath
given them unto me, is greater than all; and no one is able to snatch them out of the Father's hand</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 11:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For
the gifts and the calling of God are without repentance</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 13:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>endureth all things</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But
now abideth faith, hope, love</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>being confident of this very thing, that he who began a good work in you
will perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 3:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But the Lord is faithful, who shall establish you, and
guard you from the evil one</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 1:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I know him whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able
to guard that which I have committed unto him against that day</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who by the power of God are
guarded through faith unto a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 3:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Because thou didst keep
the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of trial, that hour which is to come upon the whole world,
to try them that dwell upon the earth.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 1:12</hi>&mdash;τὴν παραθήκην μου&mdash;Ellicott translates: <q><hi rend='italic'>the trust committed to me</hi>,</q> or <q><hi rend='italic'>my deposit</hi></q>
= the office of preaching the gospel, the stewardship entrusted to the apostle; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim.
6:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>O Timothy, keep thy deposit</hi></q>&mdash;τὴν παραθήκην; and <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 1:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Keep the good deposit</hi></q>&mdash;where
the deposit seems to be the faith or doctrine delivered to him to preach. Nicoll, The
Church's One Foundation, 211&mdash;<q>Some Christians waken each morning with a creed
of fewer articles, and those that remain they are ready to surrender to a process of
argument that convinces them. But it is a duty to <emph>keep</emph>. <q><hi rend='italic'>Ye have an anointing from the Holy
One, and ye know</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 John 2:20</hi>).... Ezra gave to his men a treasure of gold and silver and
sacrificial vessels, and he charged them: <q><hi rend='italic'>Watch ye, and keep them, until ye weigh them ... in
thy chambers of the house of Jehovah</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ezra 8:29</hi>).</q> See in the Autobiography of C. H. Spurgeon,
1:225, 256, the outline of a sermon on <hi rend='italic'>John 6:37</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>All that which the Father giveth me shall come unto
me; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.</hi></q> Mr. Spurgeon remarks that this text can
give us no comfort unless we see: 1. that God has given us his Holy Spirit; 2. that we
have given ourselves to him. Christ will not cast us out because of our great sins, our
long delays, our trying other saviors, our hardness of heart, our little faith, our poor
dull prayers, our unbelief, our inveterate corruptions, our frequent backslidings, nor
finally because every one else passes us by.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. From Reason.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It is a necessary inference from other doctrines,&mdash;such as election,
union with Christ, regeneration, justification, sanctification.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Election of certain individuals to salvation is election to bestow upon them such
influences of the Spirit as will lead them not only to accept Christ, but to persevere and
be saved. Union with Christ is indissoluble; regeneration is the beginning of a work of
new creation, which is declared in justification, and completed in sanctification. All
<pb n='883'/><anchor id='Pg883'/>
these doctrines are parts of a general scheme, which would come to naught if any
single Christian were permitted to fall away.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It accords with analogy,&mdash;God's preserving care being needed by,
and being granted to, his spiritual, as well as his natural, creation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As natural life cannot uphold itself, but we <q><hi rend='italic'>live, and move, and have our being</hi></q> in God (<hi rend='italic'>Acts
17:28</hi>), so spiritual life cannot uphold itself, and God maintains the faith, love, and holy
activity which he has originated. If he preserves our natural life, much more may we
expect him to preserve the spiritual. <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 6:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I charge thee before God who preserveth all
things alive</hi></q> (R. V. marg.)&mdash;ζωογονοῦντος τὰ πάντα = the great Preserver of all enables us to
persist in our Christian course.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It is implied in all assurance of salvation,&mdash;since this assurance is
given by the Holy Spirit, and is based not upon the known strength of
human resolution, but upon the purpose and operation of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
S. R. Mason: <q>If Satan and Adam both fell away from perfect holiness, it is a million
to one that, in a world full of temptations and with all appetites and habits against me,
I shall fall away from imperfect holiness, unless God by his almighty power keep me.</q>
It is in the power and purpose of God, then, that the believer puts his trust. But since
this trust is awakened by the Holy Spirit, it must be that there is a divine fact corresponding
to it; namely, God's purpose to exert his power in such a way that the
Christian shall persevere. See Wardlaw, Syst. Theol., 2:550-578; N. W. Taylor, Revealed
Theology, 445-460.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Job 6:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>What is my strength, that I should wait? And what is mine end, that I should be patient?</hi></q>
<q>Here is a note of self-distrust. To be patient without any outlook, to endure without
divine support&mdash;Job does not promise it, and he trembles at the prospect; but
none the less he sets his feet on the toilsome way</q> (Genung). Dr. Lyman Beecher was
asked whether he believed in the perseverance of the saints. He replied: <q>I do, except
when the wind is from the East.</q> But the value of the doctrine is that we can believe
it even when the wind <emph>is</emph> from the East. It is well to hold on to God's hand, but it is
better to have God's hand hold on to us. When we are weak, and forgetful and asleep,
we need to be sure of God's care. Like the child who thought he was driving, but who
found, after the trouble was over, that his father after all had been holding the reins,
we too find when danger comes that behind our hands are the hands of God. The Perseverance
of the Saints, looked at from the divine side, is the Preservation of the
Saints, and the hymn that expresses the Christian's faith is the hymn: <q>How firm a
foundation, ye saints of the Lord, Is laid for your faith in his excellent word!</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Objections to the Doctrine of Perseverance.</head>

<p>
These objections are urged chiefly by Arminians and by Romanists.
</p>

<p>
A. That it is inconsistent with human freedom.&mdash;Answer: It is no
more so than is the doctrine of Election or the doctrine of Decrees.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The doctrine is simply this, that God will bring to bear such influences upon all true
believers, that they will freely persevere. Moule, Outlines of Christian Doctrine, 47&mdash;<q>Is
grace, in any sense of the word, ever finally withdrawn? Yes, if by grace is meant
any free gift of God tending to salvation; or, more specially, any action of the Holy
Spirit tending in its nature thither.... But if by grace be meant the dwelling and
working of Christ in the truly regenerate, there is no indication in Scripture of the
withdrawal of it.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. That it tends to immorality.&mdash;Answer: This cannot be, since the
doctrine declares that God will save men by securing their perseverance in
holiness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 2:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Howbeit the firm foundation of God standeth, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his:
and, Let every one that nameth the name of the Lord depart from unrighteousness</hi></q>; that is, the temple of
Christian character has upon its foundation two significant inscriptions, the one declaring
God's power, wisdom, and purpose of salvation; the other declaring the purity and
holy activity, on the part of the believer, through which God's purpose is to be fulfilled;
<pb n='884'/><anchor id='Pg884'/>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 1:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>elect ... according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of the Spirit,
unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 1:10, 11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Wherefore, brethren, give the more diligence
to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never stumble: for thus shall be richly
supplied unto you the entrance into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ</hi>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. That it leads to indolence.&mdash;Answer: This is a perversion of the
doctrine, continuously possible only to the unregenerate; since, to the
regenerate, certainty of success is the strongest incentive to activity in the
conflict with sin.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 John 5:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For whatsoever is begotten of God overcometh the world; and this is the victory that hath overcome
the world, even our faith</hi>.</q> It is notoriously untrue that confidence of success inspires timidity
or indolence. Thomas Fuller: <q>Your salvation is his business; his service your
business.</q> The only prayers God will answer are those we ourselves cannot answer.
For the very reason that <q><hi rend='italic'>it is God who worketh in you both to will and to work, for his good pleasure</hi>,</q> the
apostle exhorts: <q><hi rend='italic'>work out your own salvation with fear and trembling</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:12, 13</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
D. That the Scripture commands to persevere and warnings against
apostasy show that certain, even of the regenerate, will fall away.&mdash;Answer:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) They show that some, who are apparently regenerate, will fall away.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Woe unto the world because of occasions of stumbling! for it must needs be that the occasions come;
but woe to that man through whom the occasion cometh</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For there must be also factions</hi> [lit.
<q><hi rend='italic'>heresies</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>among you, that they that are approved may be made manifest among you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 2:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>They went
out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us: but they went
out, that they might be made manifest that they all are not of us</hi>.</q> Judas probably experienced strong
emotions, and received strong impulses toward good, under the influence of Christ.
The only falling from grace which is recognized in Scripture is not the falling of the
regenerate, but the falling of the unregenerate, from influences tending to lead them
to Christ. The Rabbins said that a drop of water will suffice to purify a man who has
accidentally touched a creeping thing, but an ocean will not suffice for his cleansing so
long as he purposely keeps the creeping thing in his hand.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) They show that the truly regenerate, and those who are only apparently
so, are not certainly distinguishable in this life.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mal. 3:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth
God and him that serveth him not</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 13:25, 47</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares also among
the wheat, and went away.... Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and
gathered of every kind</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 9:6, 7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For they are not all Israel, that are of Israel: neither, because they are
Abraham's seed, are they all children</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 3:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and
thou art dead</hi>.</q> The tares were never wheat, and the bad fish never were good, in spite of
the fact that their true nature was not for a while recognized.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) They show the fearful consequences of rejecting Christ, to those
who have enjoyed special divine influences, but who are only apparently
regenerate.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:26-29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no
more a sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful expectation of judgment, and a fierceness of fire which shall devour the
adversaries. A man that hath set at nought Moses' law dieth without compassion on the word of two or three witnesses:
of how much sorer punishment, think ye, shall he be judged worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and
hath counted the blood of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the
Spirit of grace?</hi></q> Here <q><emph>sanctified</emph></q> = external sanctification, like that of the ancient Israelites,
by outward connection with God's people; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 7:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the unbelieving husband is
sanctified in the wife</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
In considering these and the following Scripture passages, much will depend upon
our view of inspiration. If we hold that Christ's promise was fulfilled and that his
apostles were led into all the truth, we shall assume that there is unity in their teaching,
and shall recognize in their variations only aspects and applications of the teaching
of our Lord; in other words, Christ's doctrine in <hi rend='italic'>John 10:28, 29</hi> will be the norm for the
<pb n='885'/><anchor id='Pg885'/>
interpretation of seemingly diverse and at first sight inconsistent passages. There was
a <q><hi rend='italic'>faith which was once for all delivered unto the saints</hi>,</q> and for this primitive faith we are exhorted
<q><hi rend='italic'>to contend earnestly</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Jude 3</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) They show what the fate of the truly regenerate would be, in case
they should not persevere.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 6:4-6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For as touching those who were once enlightened and tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the Holy Spirit, and tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, and then fell away,
it is impossible to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open shame.</hi></q> This is to be understood as a hypothetical case,&mdash;as is clear from
<hi rend='italic'>verse 9</hi> which follows: <q><hi rend='italic'>But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things which accompany salvation,
though we thus speak</hi>.</q> Dr. A. C. Kendrick, Com. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>: <q>In the phrase <q><emph>once
enlightened</emph>,</q> the <q><emph>once</emph></q> is ἅπαξ = once for all. The text describes a condition subjectively
possible, and therefore needing to be held up in earnest warning to the believer, while
objectively and in the absolute purpose of God, it never occurs.... If passages like
this teach the possibility of falling from grace, they teach also the impossibility of
restoration to it. The saint who once apostatizes has apostatized forever.</q> So <hi rend='italic'>Ez.
18:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity ... in them shall he
die</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 2:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For if, after they have escaped the defilements of the world through the knowledge of the Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and overcome, the last state is become worse with them than
the first</hi>.</q> So, in <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 5:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if the salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted?</hi></q>&mdash;if this teaches
that the regenerate may lose their religion, it also teaches that they can never recover
it. It really shows only that Christians who do not perform their proper functions as
Christians become harmful and contemptible (Broadus, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) They show that the perseverance of the truly regenerate may be
secured by these very commands and warnings.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 9:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I buffet my body, and bring it into bondage: lest by any means, after that I have preached to others,
I myself should be rejected</hi></q>&mdash;or, to bring out the meaning more fully: <q><hi rend='italic'>I beat my body blue</hi> [or,
<q>strike it under the eye</q>], <hi rend='italic'>and make it a slave, lest after having been a herald to others, I myself should be
rejected</hi></q> (<q>unapproved,</q> <q>counted unworthy of the prize</q>); <hi rend='italic'>10:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Wherefore let him that
thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall</hi>.</q> Quarles, Emblems: <q>The way to be safe is never to
be secure.</q> Wrightnour: <q>Warning a traveler to keep a certain path, and by this
means keeping him in that path, is no evidence that he will ever fall into a pit by the
side of the path simply because he is warned of it.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) They do not show that it is certain, or possible, that any truly
regenerate person will fall away.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Christian is like a man making his way up-hill, who occasionally slips back, yet
always has his face set toward the summit. The unregenerate man has his face turned
downwards, and he is slipping all the way. C. H. Spurgeon: <q>The believer, like a man
on shipboard, may fall again and again on the deck, but he will never fall overboard.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
E. That we have actual examples of such apostasy.&mdash;We answer:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Such are either men once outwardly reformed, like Judas and
Ananias, but never renewed in heart;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
But, <hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>, instance the experience of a man in typhoid fever, who apparently
repented, but who never remembered it when he was restored to health. Sick-bed and
death-bed conversions are not the best. There was one penitent thief, that none might
despair; there was but one penitent thief, that none might presume. The hypocrite
is like the wire that gets a second-hand electricity from the live wire running
parallel with it. This second-hand electricity is effective only within narrow limits,
and its efficacy is soon exhausted. The live wire has connection with the source of
power in the dynamo.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Or they are regenerate men, who, like David and Peter, have fallen
into temporary sin, from which they will, before death, be reclaimed by
God's discipline.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Instance the young profligate who, in a moment of apparent drowning, repented,
was then rescued, and afterward lived a long life as a Christian. If he had not been
<pb n='886'/><anchor id='Pg886'/>
rescued, his repentance would never have been known, nor the answer to his mother's
prayers. So, in the moment of a backslider's death, God can renew repentance and
faith. Cromwell on his death-bed questioned his Chaplain as to the doctrine of final
perseverance, and, on being assured that it was a certain truth, said: <q>Then I am
happy, for I am sure that I was once in a state of grace.</q> But reliance upon a past
experience is like trusting in the value of a policy of life insurance upon which several
years' premiums have been unpaid. If the policy has not lapsed, it is because of
extreme grace. The only conclusive evidence of perseverance is a present experience
of Christ's presence and indwelling, corroborated by active service and purity of life.
</p>

<p>
On the general subject, see Edwards, Works, 3:509-532, and 4:104; Ridgeley, Body of
Divinity, 2:164-194; John Owen, Works, vol. 11; Woods, Works, 3:221-246; Van
Oosterzee, Christian Dogmatics, 662-666.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='887'/><anchor id='Pg887'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part VII. Ecclesiology, Or The Doctrine Of The Church.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Constitution Of The Church. Or Church Polity.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Definition of the Church.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The church of Christ, in its largest signification, is the whole company
of regenerate persons in all times and ages, in heaven and on earth
(Mat. 16:18; Eph. 1:22, 23; 3:10; 5:24, 25; Col. 1:18; Heb. 12:23).
In this sense, the church is identical with the spiritual kingdom of God;
both signify that redeemed humanity in which God in Christ exercises
actual spiritual dominion (John 3:3, 5).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 16:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of Hades shall not prevail
against it</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:22, 23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and he put all things in subjection under his feet, and gave him to be head over all
things to the church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to the intent that now unto
the principalities and the powers in the heavenly places might be made known through the church the manifold wisdom
of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:24, 25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But as the church is subject to Christ, so let the wives also be to their husbands in everything.
Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself up for it</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 1:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And he is
the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the
preeminence</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 12:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the general assembly and church of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John
3:3, 5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Except one be born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God. ... Except one be born of water and the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Cicero's words apply here: <q>Una navis est jam bonorum omnium</q>&mdash;all good men
are in one boat. Cicero speaks of the state, but it is still more true of the church
invisible. Andrews, in Bib. Sac., Jan. 1883:14, mentions the following differences
between the church and kingdom, or, as we prefer to say, between the visible church
and the invisible church: (1) the church began with Christ,&mdash;the kingdom began
earlier; (2) the church is confined to believers in the historic Christ,&mdash;the kingdom
includes all God's children; (3) the church belongs wholly to this world&mdash;not so the
kingdom; (4) the church is visible,&mdash;not so the kingdom; (5) the church has <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quasi</foreign>
organic character, and leads out into local churches,&mdash;this is not so with the kingdom.
On the universal or invisible church, see Cremer, Lexicon N. T., transl., 113, 114, 331;
Jacob, Eccl. Polity of N. T., 12.
</p>

<p>
H. C. Vedder: <q>The church is a spiritual body, consisting only of those regenerated
by the Spirit of God.</q> Yet the Westminster Confession affirms that the church
<q>consists of all those throughout the world that profess the true religion, together
with their children.</q> This definition includes in the church a multitude who not only
give no evidence of regeneration, but who plainly show themselves to be unregenerate.
In many lands it practically identifies the church with the world. Augustine indeed
thought that <q><emph>the field</emph>,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 13:38</hi>, is the church, whereas Jesus says very distinctly
that it <q><emph>is the world</emph>.</q> Augustine held that good and bad alike were to be permitted to
<pb n='888'/><anchor id='Pg888'/>
dwell together in the church, without attempt to separate them; see Broadus, Com. <hi rend='italic'>in
loco</hi>. But the parable gives a reason, not why we should not try to put the wicked out
of the church, but why God does not immediately put them out of the world, the
tares being separated from the wheat only at the final judgment of mankind.
</p>

<p>
Yet the universal church includes all true believers. It fulfils the promise of God to
Abraham in <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 15:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Look now toward heaven, and number the stars, if thou be able to number them: and
he said into him, So shall thy seed be</hi>.</q> The church shall be immortal, since it draws its life from
Christ: <hi rend='italic'>Is. 65:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as the days of a tree shall be the days of my people</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Zech. 4:2, 3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>a candlestick all of
gold ... and two olive-trees by it</hi>.</q> Dean Stanley, Life and Letters, 2:242, 243&mdash;<q>A Spanish
Roman Catholic, Cervantes, said: <q>Many are the roads by which God carries his own
to heaven.</q> Döllinger: <q>Theology must become a science not, as heretofore, for making
war, but for making peace, and thus bringing about that reconciliation of churches
for which the whole civilized world is longing.</q> In their loftiest moods of inspiration,
the Catholic Thomas à Kempis, the Puritan Milton, the Anglican Keble, rose above
their peculiar tenets, and above the limits that divide denominations, into the higher
regions of a common Christianity. It was the Baptist Bunyan who taught the world
that there was <q>a common ground of communion which no difference of external rites
could efface.</q> It was the Moravian Gambold who wrote: <q>The man That could surround
the sum of things, and spy The heart of God and secrets of his empire, Would
speak but love. With love, the bright result Would change the hue of intermediate
things, And make one thing of all theology.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The church, in this large sense, is nothing less than the body of
Christ&mdash;the organism to which he gives spiritual life, and through which
he manifests the fulness of his power and grace. The church therefore
cannot be defined in merely human terms, as an aggregate of individuals
associated for social, benevolent, or even spiritual purposes. There is a
transcendent element in the church. It is the great company of persons
whom Christ has saved, in whom he dwells, to whom and through whom
he reveals God (Eph. 1:22, 23).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:22, 23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all.</hi></q> He who is the life
of nature and of humanity reveals himself most fully in the great company of those
who have joined themselves to him by faith. Union with Christ is the presupposition
of the church. This alone transforms the sinner into a Christian, and this alone makes
possible that vital and spiritual fellowship between individuals which constitutes the
organizing principle of the church. The same divine life which ensures the pardon and
the perseverance of the believer unites him to all other believers. The indwelling
Christ makes the church superior to and more permanent than all humanitarian organizations;
they die, but because Christ lives, the church lives also. Without a proper
conception of this sublime relation of the church to Christ, we cannot properly appreciate
our dignity as church members, or our high calling as shepherds of the flock. Not
<q>ubi ecclesia, ibi Christus,</q> but <q>ubi Christus, ibi ecclesia,</q> should be our motto.
Because Christ is omnipresent and omnipotent, <q><hi rend='italic'>the same yesterday, and to-day, yea and forever</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 13:8</hi>), what Burke said of the nation is true of the church: It is <q>indeed a partnership,
but a partnership not only between those who are living, but between those
who are living, those who are dead, and those who are yet to be born.</q>
</p>

<p>
McGiffert, Apostolic Church, 501&mdash;<q>Paul's conception of the church as the body of
Christ was first emphasized and developed by Ignatius. He reproduces in his writings
the substance of all the Paulinism that the church at large made permanently its own:
the preëxistence and deity of Christ, the union of the believer with Christ without
which the Christian life is impossible, the importance of Christ's death, the church the
body of Christ. Rome never fully recognized Paul's teachings, but her system rests
upon his doctrine of the church the body of Christ. The modern doctrine however
makes the kingdom to be not spiritual or future, but a reality of this world.</q> The
redemption of the body, the redemption of institutions, the redemption of nations,
are indeed all purposed by Christ. Christians should not only strive to rescue individual
men from the slough of vice, but they should devise measures for draining that
slough and making that vice impossible; in other words, they should labor for the
coming of the kingdom of God in society. But this is not to identify the church with
politics, prohibition, libraries, athletics. The spiritual fellowship is to be the fountain
<pb n='889'/><anchor id='Pg889'/>
from which all these activities spring, while at the same time Christ's <q><hi rend='italic'>kingdom is not of
this world</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 18:36</hi>).
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 24, 25, 207&mdash;<q>As Christ is the temple of God, so
the church is the temple of the Holy Spirit. As God could be seen only through Christ,
so the Holy Spirit can be seen only through the church. As Christ was the image of
the invisible God, so the church is appointed to be the image of the invisible Christ,
and the members of Christ, when they are glorified with him, shall be the express image
of his person.... The church and the kingdom are not identical terms, if we mean
by the kingdom the visible reign and government of Jesus Christ on earth. In another
sense they are identical. As is the king, so is the kingdom. The king is present now
in the world, only invisibly and by the Holy Spirit; so the kingdom is now present
invisibly and spiritually in the hearts of believers. The king is to come again visibly
and gloriously; so shall the kingdom appear visibly and gloriously. In other words,
the kingdom is already here in mystery: it is to be here to manifestation. Now the
spiritual kingdom is administered by the Holy Spirit, and it extends from Pentecost to
Parousia. At the Parousia&mdash;the appearing of the Son of man in glory&mdash;when he shall
take unto himself his great power and reign (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 11:17</hi>), when he who has now gone
into a far country to be invested with a kingdom shall return and enter upon his
government (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 19:15</hi>), then the invisible shall give way to the visible, the kingdom in
mystery shall emerge into the kingdom in manifestation, and the Holy Spirit's administration
shall yield to that of Christ.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The Scriptures, however, distinguish between this invisible or universal
church, and the individual church, in which the universal church
takes local and temporal form, and in which the idea of the church as a
whole is concretely exhibited.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 10:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Every one therefore, who shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before my Father who
is in heaven</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>12:34, 35</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. The good man out of his good
treasure bringeth forth good things</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 10:9, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if thou shalt confess with thy month Jesus as Lord, and shalt
believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved: for with the heart man believeth unto
righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>James 1:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Of his own will he brought
us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures</hi></q>&mdash;we were saved, not
for ourselves only, but as parts and beginnings of an organic kingdom of God; believers
are called <q><emph>firstfruits</emph>,</q> because from them the blessing shall spread, until the whole
world shall be pervaded with the new life; Pentecost, as the feast of first-fruits, was
but the beginning of a stream that shall continue to flow until the whole race of man
is gathered in.
</p>

<p>
R. S. Storrs: <q>When any truth becomes central and vital, there comes the desire to
utter it,</q>&mdash;and we may add, not only in words, but in organization. So beliefs crystallize
into institutions. But Christian faith is something more vital than the common
beliefs of the world. Linking the soul to Christ, it brings Christians into living fellowship
with one another before any bonds of outward organization exist; outward
organization, indeed, only expresses and symbolizes this inward union of spirit to Christ
and to one another. Horatius Bonar: <q>Thou must be true thyself, If thou the truth
wouldst teach; Thy soul must overflow, if thou Another's soul wouldst reach; It needs
the overflow of heart To give the lips full speech. Think truly, and thy thoughts Shall
the world's famine feed; Speak truly, and each word of thine Shall be a fruitful seed;
Live truly, and thy life shall be A great and noble creed.</q>
</p>

<p>
Contentio Veritatis, 128, 129&mdash;<q>The kingdom of God is first a state of the individual
soul, and then, secondly, a society made up of those who enjoy that state.</q> Dr. F. L.
Patton: <q>The best way for a man to serve the church at large is to serve the church
to which he belongs.</q> Herbert Stead: <q>The kingdom is not to be narrowed down to
the church, nor the church evaporated into the kingdom.</q> To do the first is to set up
a monstrous ecclesiasticism; to do the second is to destroy the organism through
which the kingdom manifests itself and does its work in the world (W. R. Taylor).
Prof. Dalman, in his work on The Words of Jesus in the Light of Postbiblical Writing
and the Aramaic Language, contends that the Greek phrase translated <q>kingdom of
God</q> should be rendered <q>the sovereignty of God.</q> He thinks that it points to the reign
of God, rather than to the realm over which he reigns. This rendering, if accepted,
takes away entirely the support from the Ritschlian conception of the kingdom of
God as an earthly and outward organization.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='890'/><anchor id='Pg890'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The individual church may be defined as that smaller company of
regenerate persons, who, in any given community, unite themselves voluntarily
together, in accordance with Christ's laws, for the purpose of securing
the complete establishment of his kingdom in themselves and in the
world.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And if he refuse to hear them, tell it unto the church: and if he refuse to hear the church also, let him
be unto thee as the Gentile and the publican</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 14:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>appointed for them elders in every church</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 16:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>salute
the church that is in their house</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the church of God which is at Corinth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>4:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>even
as I teach everywhere in every church</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 2:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the churches of God which are in Judæa in Christ Jesus.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
We do not define the church as a body of <q>baptized believers,</q> because baptism is but
one of <q>Christ's laws,</q> in accordance with which believers unite themselves. Since
these laws are the laws of church-organization contained in the New Testament, no
Sunday School, Temperance Society, or Young Men's Christian Association, is properly
a church. These organizations 1. lack the transcendent element&mdash;they are instituted
and managed by man only; 2. they are not confined to the regenerate, or to those alone
who give credible evidence of regeneration; 3. they presuppose and require no particular
form of doctrine; 4. they observe no ordinances; 5. they are at best mere adjuncts
and instruments of the church, but are not themselves churches; 6. their decisions
therefore are devoid of the divine authority and obligation which belong to the decisions
of the church.
</p>

<p>
The laws of Christ, in accordance with which believers unite themselves into churches,
may be summarized as follows: 1. the sufficiency and sole authority of Scripture as the
rule both of doctrine and polity; (2) credible evidence of regeneration and conversion
as prerequisite to church-membership; (3) immersion only, as answering to Christ's
command of baptism, and to the symbolic meaning of the ordinance; (4) the order of
the ordinance, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, as of divine appointment, as well as
the ordinances themselves; (5) the right of each member of the church to a voice in its
government and discipline; (6) each church, while holding fellowship with other
churches, solely responsible to Christ; (7) the freedom of the individual conscience,
and the total independence of church and state. Hovey in his Restatement of Denominational
Principles (Am. Bap. Pub. Society) gives these principles as follows: 1. the
supreme authority of the Scriptures in matters of religion; 2. personal accountability
to God in religion; 3. union with Christ essential to salvation; 4. a new life the only
evidence of that union; 5. the new life one of unqualified obedience to Christ. The
most concise statement of Baptist doctrine and history is that of Vedder, in Jackson's
Dictionary of Religious Knowledge, 1:74-85.
</p>

<p>
With the lax views of Scripture which are becoming common among us there is a
tendency in our day to lose sight of the transcendent element in the church. Let us
remember that the church is not a humanitarian organization resting upon common
human brotherhood, but a supernatural body, which traces its descent from the second,
not the first, Adam, and which manifests the power of the divine Christ. Mazzini in
Italy claimed Jesus, but repudiated his church. So modern socialists cry: <q>Liberty,
Equality, Fraternity,</q> and deny that there is need of anything more than human unity,
development, and culture. But God has made the church to sit with Christ <q><hi rend='italic'>in the heavenly
places</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:6</hi>). It is the regeneration which comes about through union with Christ
which constitutes the primary and most essential element in ecclesiology. <q>We do not
stand, first of all, for restricted communion, nor for immersion as the only valid form
of baptism, nor for any particular theory of Scripture, but rather for a regenerate
church membership. The essence of the gospel is a new life in Christ, of which Christian
experience is the outworking and Christian consciousness is the witness. Christian
life is as important as conversion. Faith must show itself by works. We must seek
the temporal as well as spiritual salvation of men, and the salvation of society also</q>
(Leighton Williams).
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson: <q>Christ founded a church only proleptically. In <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:17</hi>, ἐκκλησία
is not used technically. The church is an outgrowth of the Jewish synagogue, though
its method and economy are different. There was little or no organization at first.
Christ himself did not organize the church. This was the work of the apostles after
Pentecost. The germ however existed before. Three persons may constitute a church,
and may administer the ordinances. Councils have only advisory authority. Diocesan
episcopacy is antiscriptural and antichristian.</q>
</p>

<pb n='891'/><anchor id='Pg891'/>

<p>
The principles mentioned above are the essential principles of Baptist churches,
although other bodies of Christians have come to recognise a portion of them. Bodies
of Christians which refuse to accept these principles we may, in a somewhat loose and
modified sense, call churches; but we cannot regard them as churches organized in all
respects according to Christ's laws, or as completely answering to the New Testament
model of church organization. We follow common usage when we address a Lieutenant
Colonel as <q>Colonel,</q> and a Lieutenant Governor as <q>Governor.</q> It is only courtesy
to speak of pedobaptist organizations as <q>churches,</q> although we do not regard these
churches as organized in full accordance with Christ's laws as they are indicated to us
in the New Testament. To refuse thus to recognize them would be a discourtesy like
that of the British Commander in Chief, when he addressed General Washington as
<q>Mr. Washington.</q>
</p>

<p>
As Luther, having found the doctrine of justification by faith, could not recognize
that doctrine as Christian which taught justification by works, but denounced the
church which held it as Antichrist, saying, <q>Here I stand; I cannot do otherwise, God
help me,</q> so we, in matters not indifferent, as feet-washing, but vitally affecting the
existence of the church, as regenerate church-membership, must stand by the New
Testament, and refuse to call any other body of Christians a regular church, that is not
organized according to Christ's laws. The English word <q>church</q> like the Scotch <q>kirk</q>
and the German <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kirche</foreign>,</q> is derived from the Greek κυριακή, and means <q>belonging to
the Lord.</q> The term itself should teach us to regard only Christ's laws as our rule of
organization.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) Besides these two significations of the term <q>church,</q> there are
properly in the New Testament no others. The word ἐκκλησία is indeed
used in Acts 7:38; 19:32, 39; Heb. 2:12, to designate a popular assembly;
but since this is a secular use of the term, it does not here concern us.
In certain passages, as for example Acts 9:31 (ἐκκλησία, sing., א A B C),
1 Cor. 12:28, Phil. 3:6, and 1 Tim. 3:15, ἐκκλησία appears to be used either
as a generic or as a collective term, to denote simply the body of independent
local churches existing in a given region or at a given epoch. But
since there is no evidence that these churches were bound together in any
outward organization, this use of the term ἐκκλησία cannot be regarded as
adding any new sense to those of <q>the universal church</q> and <q>the local
church</q> already mentioned.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 7:38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the church</hi> [marg. <q><hi rend='italic'>congregation</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>in the wilderness</hi></q> = the whole body of the people of
Israel; <hi rend='italic'>19:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the assembly was in confusion</hi></q>&mdash;the tumultuous mob in the theatre at Ephesus;
<hi rend='italic'>39</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the regular assembly</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>9:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>So the church throughout all Judæa and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being
edified</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as touching zeal, persecuting the church</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that thou mayest know how men ought to
behave themselves in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
In the original use of the word ἐκκλησία, as a popular assembly, there was doubtless an
allusion to the derivation from ἐκ and καλέω, to call out by herald. Some have held that
the N. T. term contains an allusion to the fact that the members of Christ's church are
called, chosen, elected by God. This, however, is more than doubtful. In common use,
the term had lost its etymological meaning, and signified merely an assembly, however
gathered or summoned. The church was never so large that it could not assemble.
The church of Jerusalem gathered for the choice of deacons (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 6:2, 5</hi>), and the church
of Antioch gathered to hear Paul's account of his missionary journey (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 14:27</hi>).
</p>

<p>
It is only by a common figure of rhetoric that many churches are spoken of together
in the singular number, in such passages as <hi rend='italic'>Acts 9:31</hi>. We speak generically of <q>man,</q>
meaning the whole race of men; and of <q>the horse,</q> meaning all horses. Gibbon, speaking
of the successive tribes that swept down upon the Roman Empire, uses a noun in
the singular number, and describes them as <q>the several detachments of that immense
army of northern barbarians,</q>&mdash;yet he does not mean to intimate that these tribes had
any common government. So we may speak of <q>the American college</q> or <q>the American
theological seminary,</q> but we do not thereby mean that the colleges or the
seminaries are bound together by any tie of outward organization.
</p>

<p>
So Paul says that God has set in the church apostles, prophets, and teachers (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:28</hi>),
but the word <q>church</q> is only a collective term for the many independent churches.
<pb n='892'/><anchor id='Pg892'/>
In this same sense, we may speak of <q>the Baptist church</q> of New York, or of America;
but it must be remembered that we use the term without any such implication of
common government as is involved in the phrases <q>the Presbyterian church,</q> or <q>the
Protestant Episcopal church,</q> or <q>the Roman Catholic church</q>; with us, in this connection,
the term <q>church</q> means simply <q>churches.</q>
</p>

<p>
Broadus, in his Com. on Mat., page 359, suggests that the word ἐκκλησία in <hi rend='italic'>Acts 9:31</hi>,
<q>denotes the original church at Jerusalem, whose members were by the persecution
widely scattered throughout Judea and Galilee and Samaria, and held meetings wherever
they were, but still belonged to the one original organization.... When Paul
wrote to the Galatians, nearly twenty years later, these separate meetings had been
organized into distinct churches, and so he speaks (<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 1:22</hi>) in reference to that same
period, of <q><hi rend='italic'>the churches of Judæa which were in Christ</hi>.</q></q> On the meaning of ἐκκλησία, see Cremer,
Lex. N. T., 329; Trench, Syn. N. T., 1:18; Girdlestone, Syn. O. T., 367; Curtis, Progress
of Baptist Principles, 301; Dexter, Congregationalism, 25; Dagg, Church Order, 100-120;
Robinson, N. T. Lex., <hi rend='italic'>sub voce</hi>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The prevailing usage of the N. T. gives to the term ἐκκλησία the second
of these two significations. It is this local church only which has definite
and temporal existence, and of this alone we henceforth treat. Our definition
of the individual church implies the two following particulars:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. The church, like the family and the state, is an institution of
divine appointment.</head>

<p>
This is plain: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) from its relation to the church
universal, as its concrete embodiment; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) from the fact that its necessity
is grounded in the social and religious nature of man; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) from the Scripture,&mdash;as
for example, Christ's command in Mat. 18:17, and the designation
<q>church of God,</q> applied to individual churches (1 Cor. 1:2).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
President Wayland: <q>The universal church comes before the particular church.
The society which Christ has established is the foundation of every particular association
calling itself a church of Christ.</q> Andrews, in Bib. Sac., Jan. 1883:35-58, on the
conception ἐκκλησία in the N. T., says that <q>the <q>church</q> is the <foreign rend='italic'>prius</foreign> of all local
<q>churches.</q> ἐκκλησία in <hi rend='italic'>Acts 9:31</hi> = the church, so far as represented in those provinces.
It is ecumenical-local, as in <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:33</hi>. The local church is a microcosm, a specialized
localization of the universal body. קהל, in the O. T. and in the Targums, means the
whole congregation of Israel, and then secondarily those local bodies which were parts
and representations of the whole. Christ, using Aramaic, probably used קהל in <hi rend='italic'>Mat.
18:17</hi>. He took his idea of the church from it, not from the heathen use of the word
ἐκκλησία, which expresses the notion of locality and state much more than קהל. The
larger sense of ἐκκλησία is the primary. Local churches are points of consciousness and
activity for the great all-inclusive unit, and they are not themselves the units for an
ecclesiastical aggregate. They are faces, not parts of the one church.</q>
</p>

<p>
Christ, in <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:17</hi>, delegates authority to the whole congregation of believers, and at
the same time limits authority to the local church. The local church is not an end in
itself, but exists for the sake of the kingdom. Unity is not to be that of merely local
churches, but that of the kingdom, and that kingdom is internal, <q><hi rend='italic'>cometh not with observation</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Luke 17:20</hi>), but consists in <q><hi rend='italic'>righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 14:17</hi>). The
word <q>church,</q> in the universal sense, is not employed by any other N. T. writer before
Paul. Paul was interested, not simply in individual conversions, but in the growth of
the church of God, as the body of Christ. He held to the unity of all local churches
with the mother church at Jerusalem. The church in a city or in a house is merely a
local manifestation of the one universal church and derived its dignity therefrom.
Teaching of the Twelve Apostles: <q>As this broken bread was scattered upon the
mountains, and being gathered became one, so may thy church be gathered together
from the ends of the earth into thy kingdom.</q>
</p>

<p>
Sabatier, Philos. Religion, 92&mdash;<q>The social action of religion springs from its very
essence. Men of the same religion have no more imperious need than that of praying
and worshiping together. State police have always failed to confine growing religious
sects within the sanctuary or the home ... God, it is said, is the place where spirits
blend. In rising toward him, man necessarily passes beyond the limits of his own individuality.
He feels instinctively that the principle of his being is the principle of the
<pb n='893'/><anchor id='Pg893'/>
life of his brethren also, that that which gives him safety must give it to all.</q> Rothe
held that, as men reach the full development of their nature and appropriate the perfection
of the Savior, the separation between the religious and the moral life will vanish,
and the Christian state, as the highest sphere of human life representing all human
functions, will displace the church. <q>In proportion as the Savior Christianizes the
state by means of the church, must the progressive completion of the structure of the
church prove the cause of its abolition. The decline of the church is not therefore to
be deplored, but is to be recognized as the consequence of the independence and completeness
of the religious life</q> (Encyc. Brit., 21:2). But it might equally be maintained
that the state, as well as the church, will pass away, when the kingdom of God is fully
come; see <hi rend='italic'>John 4:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the hour cometh, when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall ye worship the
Father</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Then cometh the end, when he shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when
he shall have abolished all rule and all authority and power</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord
God the Almighty, and the Lamb, are the temple thereof.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. The church, unlike the family and the state, is a voluntary society.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) This results from the fact that the local church is the outward expression
of that rational and free life in Christ which characterizes the church
as a whole. In this it differs from those other organizations of divine
appointment, entrance into which is not optional. Membership in the
church is not hereditary or compulsory. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The doctrine of the church,
as thus defined, is a necessary outgrowth of the doctrine of regeneration.
As this fundamental spiritual change is mediated not by outward appliances,
but by inward and conscious reception of Christ and his truth, union
with the church logically follows, not precedes, the soul's spiritual union
with Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We have seen that the church is the body of Christ. We now perceive that the church
is, by the impartation to it of Christ's life, made a living body, with duties and powers
of its own. A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 53, emphasizes the preliminary truth.
He shows that the definition: The church a voluntary association of believers, united
together for the purposes of worship and edification, is most inadequate, not to say
incorrect. It is no more true than that hands and feet are voluntarily united in the
human body for the purposes of locomotion and work. The church is formed from
within. Christ, present by the Holy Ghost, regenerating men by the sovereign action
of the Spirit, and organizing them into himself as the living centre, is the only principle
that can explain the existence of the church. The Head and the body are therefore
one&mdash;one in fact, and one in name. He whom God anointed and filled with the Holy
Ghost is called <q><hi rend='italic'>the Christ</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 John 5:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is begotten of God</hi></q>);
and the church which is his body and fulness is also called <q><hi rend='italic'>the Christ</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>all the
members of the body, being many, are one body; so also is the Christ</hi></q>).
</p>

<p>
Dorner includes under his doctrine of the church: (1) the genesis of the church,
through the new birth of the Spirit, or Regeneration; (2) the growth and persistence
of the church through the continuous operation of the Spirit in the means of grace, or
Ecclesiology proper, as others call it; (3) the completion of the church, or Eschatology.
While this scheme seems designed to favor a theory of baptismal regeneration, we
must commend its recognition of the fact that the doctrine of the church grows out of
the doctrine of regeneration and is determined in its nature by it. If regeneration has
always conversion for its obverse side, and if conversion always includes faith in Christ,
it is vain to speak of regeneration without faith. And if union with the church is
but the outward expression of a preceding union with Christ which involves regeneration
and conversion, then involuntary church-membership is an absurdity, and a
misrepresentation of the whole method of salvation.
</p>

<p>
The value of compulsory religion may be illustrated from David Hume's experience.
A godly matron of the Canongate, so runs the story, when Hume sank in the mud in
her vicinity, and on account of his obesity could not get out, compelled the sceptic to
say the Lord's Prayer before she would help him. Amos Kendall, on the other hand,
concluded in his old age that he had not been acting on Christ's plan for saving the
world, and so, of his own accord, connected himself with the church. Martineau, Study,
1:319&mdash;<q>Till we come to the State and the Church, we do not reach the highest organism
<pb n='894'/><anchor id='Pg894'/>
of human life, into the perfect working of which all the disinterested affections
and moral enthusiasms and noble ambitions flow.</q>
</p>

<p>
Socialism abolishes freedom, which the church cultivates and insists upon as the
principle of its life. Tertullian: <q>Nec religionis est cogere religionem</q>&mdash;<q>It is not
the business of religion to compel religion.</q> Vedder, History of the Baptists: <q>The
community of goods in the church at Jerusalem was a purely voluntary matter; see
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 5:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>While it remained, did it not remain thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thy power?</hi></q> The
community of goods does not seem to have continued in the church at Jerusalem
after the temporary stress had been relieved, and there is no reason to believe that any
other church in the apostolic age practised anything of the kind.</q> By abolishing
freedom, socialism destroys all possibility of economical progress. The economical
principle of socialism is that, relatively to the enjoyment of commodities, the individual
shall be taken care of by the community, to the effect of his being relieved of the
care of himself. The communism in the Acts was: 1. not for the community of
mankind in general, but only for the church within itself; 2. not obligatory, but left
to the discretion of individuals; 3. not permanent, but devised for a temporary crisis.
On socialism, see James MacGregor, in Presb. and Ref. Rev., Jan. 1892:35-68.
</p>

<p>
Schurman, Agnosticism, 166&mdash;<q>Few things are of more practical consequence for
the future of religion in America than the duty of all good men to become identified
with the visible church. Liberal thinkers have, as a rule, underestimated the value of
the church. Their point of view is individualistic, <q>as though a man were author of
himself, and knew no other kin.</q> <q>The old is for slaves</q> they declare. But it is also
true that the old is for freedmen who know its true uses. It is the bane of the religion
of dogma that it has driven many of the choicest religious souls out of the churches.
In its purification of the temple, it has lost sight of the object of the temple. The
church, as an institution, is an organism and embodiment such as the religion of spirit
necessarily creates. Spiritual religion is not the enemy, it is the essence, of institutional
religion.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Organization of the Church.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. The fact of organization.</head>

<p>
Organization may exist without knowledge of writing, without written
records, lists of members, or formal choice of officers. These last are the
proofs, reminders, and helps of organization, but they are not essential to
it. It is however not merely informal, but formal, organization in the
church, to which the New Testament bears witness.
</p>

<p>
That there was such organization is abundantly shown from (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) its stated
meetings, (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) elections, and (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) officers; (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) from the designations of its
ministers, together with (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) the recognized authority of the minister and
of the church; (<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) from its discipline, (<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) contributions, (<hi rend='italic'>h</hi>) letters of
commendation, (<hi rend='italic'>i</hi>) registers of widows, (<hi rend='italic'>j</hi>) uniform customs, and (<hi rend='italic'>k</hi>)
ordinances; (<hi rend='italic'>l</hi>) from the order enjoined and observed, (<hi rend='italic'>m</hi>) the qualifications
for membership, and (<hi rend='italic'>n</hi>) the common work of the whole body.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>upon the first day of the week, when we were gathered together to break bread, Paul discoursed
with them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>not forsaking our own assembling together, as the custom of some is, but exhorting one
another.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Acts 1:23-26</hi>&mdash;the election of Matthias; 6:5, 6&mdash;the election of deacons.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the saints in Christ Jesus that are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:17, 28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the elders of the church ... the flock, in which the Holy Spirit hath made you bishops</hi>
[marg.: <q><hi rend='italic'>overseers</hi></q>].</q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And if he refuse to hear them, tell it unto the church: and if he refuse to hear the church also,
let him be unto thee as the Gentile and the publican</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 5:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Tend the flock of God which is among you,
exercising the oversight, not of constraint, but willingly, according to the will of God.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 5:4, 5, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in the name of our Lord Jesus, ye being gathered together, and my spirit, with the power
of our Lord Jesus, to deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus.... Put away the wicked man from among yourselves.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 15:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For it hath been the good pleasure of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for
the poor among the saints that are at Jerusalem</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 16:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I
<pb n='895'/><anchor id='Pg895'/>
gave order to the churches of Galatia, so also do ye. Upon the first day of the week let each one of you lay by him in
store, as he may prosper, that no collection be made when I come.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>h</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Acts 18:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And when he was minded to pass over into Achaia, the brethren encouraged him, and wrote to
the disciples to receive him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 3:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Are we beginning again to commend ourselves? or need we, as do some,
epistles of commendation to you or from you?</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>i</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 5:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Let none be enrolled as a widow under threescore years old</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 6:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>there arose a
murmuring of the Grecian Jews against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>j</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But if any man seemeth to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of
God.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>k</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:41</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>They then that received his word were baptized</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:23-26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For I received of the
Lord that which also I delivered unto you</hi></q>&mdash;the institution of the Lord's Supper.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>l</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 14:40</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>let all things be done decently and in order</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For though I am absent in the
flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>m</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Go ye therefore, and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them into the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:47</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the Lord added to them day by day those that were
being saved.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>n</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>because for the work of Christ he came nigh unto death, hazarding his life to supply that which
was lacking in your service toward me.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
As indicative of a developed organization in the N. T. church, of which
only the germ existed before Christ's death, it is important to notice the
progress in names from the Gospels to the Epistles. In the Gospels, the
word <q>disciples</q> is the common designation of Christ's followers, but it is
not once found in the Epistles. In the Epistles, there are only <q>saints,</q>
<q>brethren,</q> <q>churches.</q> A consideration of the facts here referred to is
sufficient to evince the unscriptural nature of two modern theories of the
church:
</p>

<p>
A. The theory that the church is an exclusively spiritual body, destitute
of all formal organization, and bound together only by the mutual relation
of each believer to his indwelling Lord.
</p>

<p>
The church, upon this view, so far as outward bonds are concerned, is
only an aggregation of isolated units. Those believers who chance to
gather at a particular place, or to live at a particular time, constitute the
church of that place or time. This view is held by the Friends and by the
Plymouth Brethren. It ignores the tendencies to organization inherent in
human nature; confounds the visible with the invisible church; and is
directly opposed to the Scripture representations of the visible church as
comprehending some who are not true believers.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 5:1-11</hi>&mdash;Ananias and Sapphira show that the visible church comprehended some
who were not true believers; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 14:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If therefore the whole church be assembled together and all
speak with tongues, and there come in men unlearned or unbelieving, will they not say that ye are mad?</hi></q>&mdash;here,
if the church had been an unorganized assembly, the unlearned visitors who came in
would have formed a part of it; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For many walk, of whom I told you often, and now tell
you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Some years ago a book was placed upon the Index, at Rome, entitled: <q>The Priesthood
a Chronic Disorder of the Human Race.</q> The Plymouth Brethren dislike church
organizations, for fear they will become machines; they dislike ordained ministers, for
fear they will become bishops. They object to praying for the Holy Spirit, because he
was given on Pentecost, ignoring the fact that the church after Pentecost so prayed:
see <hi rend='italic'>Acts 4:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And when they had prayed, the place was shaken wherein they were gathered together; and they
were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and they spake the word of God with boldness.</hi></q> What we call a giving or
descent of the Holy Spirit is, since the Holy Spirit is omnipresent, only a manifestation
of the power of the Holy Spirit, and this certainly may be prayed for; see <hi rend='italic'>Luke 11:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If
ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
The Plymouth Brethren would <q>unite Christendom by its dismemberment, and do
away with all sects by the creation of a new sect, more narrow and bitter in its hostility
<pb n='896'/><anchor id='Pg896'/>
to existing sects than any other.</q> Yet the tendency to organize is so strong in human
nature, that even Plymouth Brethren, when they meet regularly together, fall into an
informal, if not a formal, organization; certain teachers and leaders are tacitly recognized
as officers of the body; committees and rules are unconsciously used for facilitating
business. Even one of their own writers, C. H. M., speaks of the <q>natural tendency
to association without God,&mdash;as in the Shinar Association or Babel Confederacy of <hi rend='italic'>Gen.
11</hi>, which aimed at building up a name upon the earth. The Christian church is God's
appointed association to take the place of all these. Hence God confounds the tongues
in Gen. 11 (judgment); gives tongues in <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2</hi> (grace); but only one tongue is spoken in
<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 7</hi> (glory).</q>
</p>

<p>
The Nation, Oct. 16, 1890:303&mdash;<q>Every body of men must have one or more leaders.
If these are not provided, they will make them for themselves. You cannot get fifty
men together, at least of the Anglo-Saxon race, without their choosing a presiding
officer and giving him power to enforce rules and order.</q> Even socialists and anarchists
have their leaders, who often exercise arbitrary power and oppress their followers.
Lyman Abbott says nobly of the community of true believers: <q>The grandest
river in the world has no banks; it rises in the Gulf of Mexico; it sweeps up through
the Atlantic Ocean along our coast; it crosses the Atlantic, and spreads out in great
broad fanlike form along the coast of Europe; and whatever land it kisses blooms and
blossoms with the fruit of its love. The apricot and the fig are the witness of its fertilizing
power. It is bound together by the warmth of its own particles, and by nothing
else.</q> This is a good illustration of the invisible church, and of its course through
the world. But the visible church is bound to be distinguishable from unregenerate
humanity, and its inner principle of association inevitably leads to organization.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Wm. Reid, Plymouth Brethrenism Unveiled, 79-143, attributes to the sect the
following Church-principles: (1) the church did not exist before Pentecost; (2) the
visible and the invisible church identical; (3) the one assembly of God; (4) the presidency
of the Holy Spirit; (5) rejection of a one-man and man-made ministry; (6) the
church is without government. Also the following heresies: (1) Christ's heavenly
humanity; (2) denial of Christ's righteousness, as being obedience to law; (3) denial
that Christ's righteousness is imputed; (4) justification in the risen Christ; (5) Christ's
non-atoning sufferings; (6) denial of moral law as rule of life; (7) the Lord's day is
not the Sabbath; (8) perfectionism; (9) secret rapture of the saints,&mdash;caught up to be
with Christ. To these we may add; (10) premillennial advent of Christ.
</p>

<p>
On the Plymouth Brethren and their doctrine, see British Quar., Oct. 1873:202;
Princeton Rev., 1872:48-77; H. M. King, in Baptist Review, 1881:438-465; Fish, Ecclesiology,
314-316; Dagg, Church Order, 80-83; R. H. Carson, The Brethren, 8-14; J. C. L.
Carson, The Heresies of the Plymouth Brethren; Croskery, Plymouth Brethrenism;
Teulon, Hist. and Teachings of Plymouth Brethren.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The theory that the form of church organization is not definitely
prescribed in the New Testament, but is a matter of expediency, each body
of believers being permitted to adopt that method of organization which
best suits its circumstances and condition.
</p>

<p>
The view under consideration seems in some respects to be favored by
Neander, and is often regarded as incidental to his larger conception of
church history as a progressive development. But a proper theory of
development does not exclude the idea of a church organization already
complete in all essential particulars before the close of the inspired canon,
so that the record of it may constitute a providential example of binding
authority upon all subsequent ages. The view mentioned exaggerates the
differences of practice among the N. T. churches; underestimates the need
of divine direction as to methods of church union; and admits a principle
of 'church powers,' which may be historically shown to be subversive of
the very existence of the church as a spiritual body.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Dr. Galusha Anderson finds the theory of optional church government in Hooker's
Ecclesiastical Polity, and says that not until Bishop Bancroft was there claimed a
divine right of Episcopacy. Hunt, also, in his Religious Thought in England, 1:57, says
that Hooker gives up the divine origin of Episcopacy. So Jacob, Eccl. Polity of the
<pb n='897'/><anchor id='Pg897'/>
N. T., and Hatch, Organization of Early Christian Churches,&mdash;both Jacob and Hatch
belonging to the Church of England. Hooker identified the church with the nation;
see Eccl. Polity, book viii, chap. 1:7; 4:6; 8:9. He held that the state has committed
itself to the church, and that therefore the church has no right to commit itself to the
state. The assumption, however, that the state has committed itself to the church is
entirely unwarranted; see Gore, Incarnation, 209, 210. Hooker declares that, even if
the Episcopalian order were laid down in Scripture, which he denies, it would still not
be unalterable, since neither <q>God's being the author of laws for the government of
his church, nor his committing them unto Scripture, is any reason sufficient wherefore
all churches should forever be bound to keep them without change.</q>
</p>

<p>
T. M. Lindsay, in Contemp. Rev., Oct. 1895:548-563, asserts that there were at least five
different forms of church government in apostolic times: 1. derived from the seven
wise men of the Hebrew village community, representing the political side of the
synagogue system; 2. derived from the ἐπισκόπος, the director of the religious or social
club among the heathen Greeks; 3. derived from the patronate (προστάτης, προῖστάμενος)
known among the Romans, the churches of Rome, Corinth, Thessalonica, being of this
sort; 4. derived from the personal preëminence of one man, nearest in family to our
Lord, James being president of the church at Jerusalem; 5. derived from temporary
superintendents (ἡγούμενοι), or leaders of the band of missionaries, as in Crete and
Ephesus. Between all these churches of different polities, there was intercommunication
and fellowship. Lindsay holds that the unity was wholly spiritual. It seems to
us that he has succeeded merely in proving five different varieties of one generic type&mdash;the
generic type being only democratic, with two orders of officials, and two ordinances&mdash;in
other words, in showing that the simple N. T. model adopts itself to many
changing conditions, while the main outlines do not change. Upon any other theory,
church polity is a matter of individual taste or of temporary fashion. Shall missionaries
conform church order to the degraded ideas of the nations among which they
labor? Shall church government be despotic in Turkey, a limited monarchy in England,
a democracy in the United States of America, and two-headed in Japan? For
the development theory of Neander, see his Church History, 1:179-190. On the general
subject, see Hitchcock, in Am. Theol. Rev., 1860:28-54; Davidson, Eccl. Polity, 1-42;
Harvey, The Church.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. The nature of this organization.</head>

<p>
The nature of any organization may be determined by asking, first: who
constitute its members? secondly: for what object has it been formed?
and, thirdly: what are the laws which regulate its operations?
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The three questions with which our treatment of the nature of this organization
begins are furnished us by Pres. Wayland, in his Principles and Practices of Baptists.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
A. They only can properly be members of the local church, who have
previously become members of the church universal,&mdash;or, in other words,
have become regenerate persons.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Only those who have been previously united to Christ are, in the New Testament,
permitted to unite with his church. See <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:47</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the Lord added to them day by day those
that were being saved</hi> [Am. Rev.: <q><hi rend='italic'>those that were saved</hi></q>]</q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and believers were the more added to
the Lord</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the church of God which is at Corinth, even them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to
be saints, with all that call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, their Lord and ours.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
From this limitation of membership to regenerate persons, certain
results follow:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Since each member bears supreme allegiance to Christ, the church
as a body must recognize Christ as the only lawgiver. The relation of the
individual Christian to the church does not supersede, but furthers and
expresses, his relation to Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 John 2:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And ye have an anointing from the Holy One, and ye know all things</hi></q>&mdash;see Neander, Com.,
<hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>&mdash;<q>No believer is at liberty to forego this maturity and personal independence,
bestowed in that inward anointing [of the Holy Spirit], or to place himself in a dependent
relation, inconsistent with this birthright, to any teacher whatever among men.....
<pb n='898'/><anchor id='Pg898'/>
This inward anointing furnishes an element of resistance to such arrogated
authority.</q> Here we have reproved the tendency on the part of ministers to take the
place of the church, in Christian work and worship, instead of leading it forward in
work and worship of its own. The missionary who keeps his converts in prolonged
and unnecessary tutelage is also untrue to the church organization of the New Testament
and untrue to Christ whose aim in church training is to educate his followers to
the bearing of responsibility and the use of liberty. Macaulay: <q>The only remedy for
the evils of liberty is liberty.</q> <q>Malo periculosam libertatem</q>&mdash;<q>Liberty is to be preferred
with all its dangers.</q> Edwin Burritt Smith: <q>There is one thing better than
good government, and that is self-government.</q> By their own mistakes, a self-governing
people and a self-governing church will finally secure good government, whereas
the <q>good government</q> which keeps them in perpetual tutelage will make good
government forever impossible.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 144:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>our sons shall be as plants grown up in their youth.</hi></q> Archdeacon Hare: <q>If a gentleman
is to grow up, it must be like a tree: there must be nothing between him and
heaven.</q> What is true of the gentleman is true of the Christian. There need to be
encouraged and cultivated in him an independence of human authority and a sole
dependence upon Christ. The most sacred duty of the minister is to make his church
self-governing and self-supporting, and the best test of his success is the ability of the
church to live and prosper after he has left it or after he is dead. Such ministerial
work requires self-sacrifice and self-effacement. The natural tendency of every minister
is to usurp authority and to become a bishop. He has in him an undeveloped
pope. Dependence on his people for support curbs this arrogant spirit. A church
establishment fosters it. The remedy both for slavishness and for arrogance lies in
constant recognition of Christ as the only Lord.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Since each regenerate man recognizes in every other a brother in
Christ, the several members are upon a footing of absolute equality (Mat.
23:8-10).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 23:8-10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your teacher, and all ye are brethren. And call no man
your father on the earth: for one is your Father, even he who is in heaven</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 15:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I am the vine, ye are the
branches</hi></q>&mdash;no one branch of the vine outranks another; one may be more advantageously
situated, more ample in size, more fruitful; but all are alike in kind, draw
vitality from one source. Among the planets <q><hi rend='italic'>one star differeth from another star in glory</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor.
15:41</hi>), yet all shine in the same heaven, and draw their light from the same sun. <q>The
serving-man may know more of the mind of God than the scholar.</q> Christianity has
therefore been the foe to heathen castes. The Japanese noble objected to it, <q>because
the brotherhood of man was incompatible with proper reverence for rank</q>. There can
be no rightful human lordship over God's heritage (<hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 5:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>neither as lording it over the
charge allotted to you, but making yourselves ensamples to the flock</hi></q>).
</p>

<p>
Constantine thought more highly of his position as member of Christ's church than
of his position as head of the Roman Empire. Neither the church nor its pastor should
be dependent upon the unregenerate members of the congregation. Many a pastor is
in the position of a lion tamer with his head in the lion's mouth. So long as he strokes
the fur the right way, all goes well; but, if by accident he strokes the wrong way, off
goes his head. Dependence upon the spiritual body which he instructs is compatible
with the pastor's dignity and faithfulness. But dependence upon those who are not
Christians and who seek to manage the church with worldly motives and in a worldly
way, may utterly destroy the spiritual effect of his ministry. The pastor is bound to
be the impartial preacher of the truth, and to treat each member of his church as of
equal importance with every other.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Since each local church is directly subject to Christ, there is no
jurisdiction of one church over another, but all are on an equal footing,
and all are independent of interference or control by the civil power.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 22:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Render therefore unto Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's; and unto God the things that are God's</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 5:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We must obey God rather than men.</hi></q> As each believer has personal dealings with
Christ and for even the pastor to come between him and his Lord is treachery to Christ
and harmful to his soul, so much more does the New Testament condemn any attempt
to bring the church into subjection to any other church or combination of churches,
or to make the church the creature of the state. Absolute liberty of conscience under
<pb n='899'/><anchor id='Pg899'/>
Christ has always been a distinguishing tenet of Baptists, as it is of the New Testament
(<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 14:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Who art thou that judgest the servant of another? to his own lord he standeth or falleth. Yea, he
shall be made to stand; for the Lord hath power to make him stand</hi></q>). John Locke, 100 years before
American independence: <q>The Baptists were the first and only propounders of absolute
liberty, just and true liberty, equal and impartial liberty.</q> George Bancroft says
of Roger Williams: <q>He was the first person in modern Christendom to assert the
doctrine of liberty of conscience in religion.... Freedom of conscience was from
the first a trophy of the Baptists.... Their history is written in blood.</q>
</p>

<p>
On Roger Williams, see John Fiske, The Beginnings of New England: <q>Such views
are to-day quite generally adopted by the more civilized portions of the Protestant
world; but it is needless to say that they were not the views of the sixteenth century,
in Massachusetts or elsewhere.</q> Cotton Mather said that Roger Williams <q>carried a
windmill in his head,</q> and even John Quincy Adams called him <q>conscientiously contentious.</q>
Cotton Mather's windmill was one that he remembered or had heard of in
Holland. It had run so fast in a gale as to set itself and a whole town on fire. Leonard
Bacon, Genesis of the New England Churches, vii, says of Baptist churches: <q>It has
been claimed for these churches that from the age of the Reformation onward they
have been always foremost and always consistent in maintaining the doctrine of religious
liberty. Let me not be understood as calling in question their right to so great an
honor.</q>
</p>

<p>
Baptists hold that the province of the state is purely secular and civil,&mdash;religious
matters are beyond its jurisdiction. Yet for economic reasons and to ensure its own
preservation, it may guarantee to its citizens their religious rights, and may exempt
all churches equally from burdens of taxation, in the same way in which it exempts
schools and hospitals. The state has holidays, but no holy days. Hall Caine, in The
Christian, calls the state, not the pillar of the church, but the caterpillar, that eats the
vitals out of it. It is this, when it transcends its sphere and compels or forbids any
particular form of religious teaching. On the charge that Roman Catholics were
deprived of equal rights in Rhode Island, see Am. Cath. Quar. Rev., Jan. 1894:169-177.
This restriction was not in the original law, but was a note added by revisers, to bring
the state law into conformity with the law of the mother country. <hi rend='italic'>Ezra 8:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I was
ashamed to ask of the king a band of soldiers and horsemen ... because ... The hand of our God is upon all them
that seek him, for good</hi></q>&mdash;is a model for the churches of every age. The church as an organized
body should be ashamed to depend for revenue upon the state, although its members
as citizens may justly demand that the state protect them in their rights of
worship. On State and Church in 1492 and 1892, see A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation,
209-246, esp. 239-241. On taxation of church property, and opposing it, see H. C. Vedder,
in Magazine of Christian Literature, Feb. 1890: 265-272.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The sole object of the local church is the glory of God, in the complete
establishment of his kingdom, both in the hearts of believers and in
the world. This object is to be promoted:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) By united worship,&mdash;including prayer and religious instruction;
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) by mutual watchcare and exhortation; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) by common labors for the
reclamation of the impenitent world.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>not forsaking our own assembling together, as the custom of some is, but exhorting one another.</hi></q>
One burning coal by itself will soon grow dull and go out, but a hundred together will
give a fury of flame that will set fire to others. Notice the value of <q>the crowd</q> in
politics and in religion. One may get an education without going to school or college,
and may cultivate religion apart from the church; but the number of such people will
be small, and they do not choose the best way to become intelligent or religious.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 5:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Wherefore exhort one another, and build each other up, even as also ye do</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 3:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Exhort
one another day by day, so long as it is called To-day; lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of
sin.</hi></q> Churches exist in order to: 1. create ideals; 2. supply motives; 3. direct energies.
They are the leaven hidden in the three measures of meal. But there must be
life in the leaven, or no good will come of it. There is no use of taking to China a lamp
that will not burn in America. The light that shines the furthest shines brightest
nearest home.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Go ye therefore, and make disciples of all the nations</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 8:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>They therefore that were
scattered abroad went about preaching the word</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 8:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and this, not as we had hoped, but first they gave
their own selves to the Lord, and to us through the will of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jude 23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And on some have mercy, who are in
<pb n='900'/><anchor id='Pg900'/>
doubt; and some save, snatching them out of the fire.</hi></q> Inscribed upon a mural tablet of a Christian
church, in Aneityum in the South Seas, to the memory of Dr. John Geddie, the pioneer
missionary in that field, are the words: <q>When he came here, there were no Christians;
when he went away, there were no heathen.</q> Inscription over the grave of
David Livingstone in Westminster Abbey: <q>For thirty years his life was spent in an
unwearied effort to evangelize the native races, to explore the undiscovered secrets, to
abolish the desolating slave trade of Central Africa, where with his last words he
wrote: <q>All I can add in my solitude is, May Heaven's richest blessing come down on
everyone, American, English or Turk, who will help to heal this open sore of the
world.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. The law of the church is simply the will of Christ, as expressed in
the Scriptures and interpreted by the Holy Spirit. This law respects:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The qualifications for membership.&mdash;These are regeneration and
baptism, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, spiritual new birth and ritual new birth; the surrender of
the inward and of the outward life to Christ; the spiritual entrance into
communion with Christ's death and resurrection, and the formal profession
of this to the world by being buried with Christ and rising with him in
baptism.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The duties imposed on members.&mdash;In discovering the will of Christ
from the Scriptures, each member has the right of private judgment, being
directly responsible to Christ for his use of the means of knowledge, and
for his obedience to Christ's commands when these are known.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
How far does the authority of the church extend? It certainly has no right to say
what its members shall eat and drink; to what societies they shall belong; what
alliances in marriage or in business they shall contract. It has no right, as an organized
body, to suppress vice in the community, or to regenerate society by taking sides
in a political canvass. The members of the church, as citizens, have duties in all these
lines of activity. The function of the church is to give them religious preparation and
stimulus for their work. In this sense, however, the church is to influence all human
relations. It follows the model of the Jewish commonwealth rather than that of the
Greek state. The Greek πόλις was limited, because it was the affirmation of only personal
rights. The Jewish commonwealth was universal, because it was the embodiment
of the one divine will. The Jewish state was the most comprehensive of the ancient
world, admitting freely the incorporation of new members, and looking forward to a
worldwide religious communion in one faith. So the Romans gave to conquered lands
the protection and the rights of Rome. But the Christian church is the best example
of incorporation in conquest. See Westcott, Hebrews, 386, 387; John Fiske, Beginnings
of New England, 1-20; Dagg, Church Order, 74-99; Curtis on Communion, 1-61.
</p>

<p>
Abraham Lincoln: <q>This country cannot be half slave and half free</q> = the one part
will pull the other over; there is an irrepressible conflict between them. So with the
forces of Christ and of Antichrist in the world at large. Alexander Duff: <q>The church
that ceases to be evangelistic will soon cease to be evangelical.</q> We may add that the
church that ceases to be evangelical will soon cease to exist. The Fathers of New
England proposed <q>to advance the gospel in these remote parts of the world, even if
they should be but as stepping-stones to those who were to follow them.</q> They little
foresaw how their faith and learning would give character to the great West. Church
and school went together. Christ alone is the Savior of the world, but Christ alone
cannot save the world. Zinzendorf called his society <q>The Mustard-seed Society</q>
because it should remove mountains (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 17:20</hi>). Hermann, Faith and Morals, 91, 238&mdash;<q>It
is not by means of things that pretend to be imperishable that Christianity continues
to live on; but by the fact that there are always persons to be found who, by
their contact with the Bible traditions, become witnesses to the personality of Jesus
and follow him as their guide, and therefore acquire sufficient courage to sacrifice
themselves for others.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. The genesis of this organization.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The church existed in germ before the day of Pentecost,&mdash;otherwise
there would have been nothing to which those converted upon that day
<pb n='901'/><anchor id='Pg901'/>
could have been <q>added</q> (Acts 2:47). Among the apostles, regenerate
as they were, united to Christ by faith and in that faith baptized (Acts 19:4),
under Christ's instruction and engaged in common work for him, there
were already the beginnings of organization. There was a treasurer of the
body (John 13:29), and as a body they celebrated for the first time the
Lord's Supper (Mat. 26:26-29). To all intents and purposes they constituted
a church, although the church was not yet fully equipped for its work
by the outpouring of the Spirit (Acts 2), and by the appointment of pastors
and deacons. The church existed without officers, as in the first days succeeding
Pentecost.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:47</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the Lord added to them</hi> [marg.: <q><hi rend='italic'>together</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>day by day those that were being saved</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>19:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And
Paul said, John baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe on him
that should come after him, that is, on Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 13:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For some thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus
said unto him, Buy what things we have need of for the feast; or, that he should give something to the poor</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat.
26:26-29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And as they were eating, Jesus took bread ... and he gave to the disciples, and said, Take, eat....
And he took a cup, and gave thanks, and gave to them, saying, Drink ye all of it</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2</hi>&mdash;the Holy Spirit is
poured out. It is to be remembered that Christ himself is the embodied union between
God and man, the true temple of God's indwelling. So soon as the first believer joined
himself to Christ, the church existed in miniature and germ.
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 55, quotes <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:41</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and there were added,</hi></q> not to
them, or to the church, but, as in <hi rend='italic'>Acts 5:14</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>11:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to the Lord.</hi></q> This, Dr. Gordon
declares, means not a mutual union of believers, but their divine coüniting with Christ;
not voluntary association of Christians, but their sovereign incorporation into the
Head, and this incorporation effected by the Head, through the Holy Spirit. The old
proverb, <q>Tres faciunt ecclesiam,</q> is always true when one of the three is Jesus (Dr.
Deems). Cyprian was wrong when he said that <q>he who has not the church for his
mother, has not God for his Father</q>; for this could not account for the conversion of
the first Christian, and it makes salvation dependent upon the church rather than upon
Christ. The Cambridge Platform, 1648, chapter 6, makes officers essential, not to the
being, but only to the well being, of churches, and declares that elders and deacons
are the only ordinary officers; see Dexter, Congregationalism, 439.
</p>

<p>
Fish, Ecclesiology, 14-11, by a striking analogy, distinguishes three periods of the
church's life: (1) the pre-natal period, in which the church is not separated from
Christ's bodily presence; (2) the period of childhood, in which the church is under
tutelage, preparing for an independent life; (3) the period of maturity, in which the
church, equipped with doctrines and officers, is ready for self-government. The three
periods may be likened to bud, blossom, and fruit. Before Christ's death, the church
existed in bud only.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That provision for these offices was made gradually as exigencies
arose, is natural when we consider that the church immediately after Christ's
ascension was under the tutelage of inspired apostles, and was to be prepared,
by a process of education, for independence and self-government.
As doctrine was communicated gradually yet infallibly, through the oral
and written teaching of the apostles, so we are warranted in believing that
the church was gradually but infallibly guided to the adoption of Christ's
own plan of church organization and of Christian work. The same promise
of the Spirit which renders the New Testament an unerring and sufficient
rule of faith, renders it also an unerring and sufficient rule of practice, for
the church in all places and times.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 16:12-26</hi> is to be interpreted as a promise of gradual leading by the Spirit into all
the truth; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 14:37</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the things which I write unto you ... they are the commandments of the Lord.</hi></q>
An examination of Paul's epistles in their chronological order shows a progress in definiteness
of teaching with regard to church polity, as well as with regard to doctrine in
general. In this matter, as in other matters, apostolic instruction was given as providential
exigencies demanded it. In the earliest days of the church, attention was paid
<pb n='902'/><anchor id='Pg902'/>
to preaching rather than to organization. Like Luther, Paul thought more of church
order in his later days than at the beginning of his work. Yet even in his first epistle
we find the germ which is afterwards continuously developed. See:
</p>

<p>
(1) <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 5:12, 13</hi> (A. D. 52)&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But we beseech you, brethren, to know them that labor among you, and are
over you</hi> (προῖσταμένους) <hi rend='italic'>in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them exceeding highly in love for their
work's sake.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
(2) <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:28</hi> (A. D. 57)&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly
teachers, then miracles, then gifts of healings, helps</hi> [ἀντιλήψεις = gifts needed by deacons], <hi rend='italic'>governments</hi>
[κυβερνήσεις = gifts needed by pastors], <hi rend='italic'>divers kinds of tongues</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
(3) <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 12:6-8</hi> (A. D. 58)&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And having gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether
prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of our faith; or ministry</hi> [διακονίαν], <hi rend='italic'>let us give ourselves to
our ministry; or he that teacheth, to his teaching; or he that exhorteth, to his exhorting: he that giveth, let him do it
with liberality; he that ruleth</hi> [ὁ προῖσταμένος], <hi rend='italic'>with diligence; he that showeth mercy, with cheerfulness</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
(4) <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:1</hi> (A. D. 62)&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Paul and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus that are
at Philippi, with the bishops</hi> [ἐπισκόποις, marg.: <q><hi rend='italic'>overseers</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>and deacons</hi> [διακόνοις].</q>
</p>

<p>
(5) <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:11</hi> (A. D. 63)&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And he gave some to be apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and
some, pastors and teachers</hi> [ποιμένας καὶ διδασκάλους].</q>
</p>

<p>
(6) <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:1, 2</hi> (A. D. 66)&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If a man seeketh the office of a bishop, he desireth a good work. The bishop</hi>
[τὸν ἐπίσκοπον] <hi rend='italic'>therefore must be without reproach</hi>.</q> On this last passage, Huther in Meyer's Com.
remarks: <q>Paul in the beginning looked at the church in its unity,&mdash;only gradually
does he make prominent its leaders. We must not infer that the churches in earlier
time were without leadership, but only that in the later time circumstances were such
as to require him to lay emphasis upon the pastor's office and work.</q> See also Schaff,
Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, 62-75.
</p>

<p>
McGiffert, in his Apostolic Church, puts the dates of Paul's Epistles considerably
earlier, as for example: <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess.</hi>, circ. 48; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor.</hi>, c. 51, 52; <hi rend='italic'>Rom.</hi>, 52, 53; <hi rend='italic'>Phil.</hi>, 56-58; <hi rend='italic'>Eph.</hi>, 52, 53,
or 56-58; <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim.</hi>, 56-58. But even before the earliest Epistles of Paul comes <hi rend='italic'>James 5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Is
any among you sick? let him call for the elders of the church</hi></q>&mdash;written about 48 A. D., and showing
that within twenty years after the death of our Lord there had grown up a very definite
form of church organization.
</p>

<p>
On the question how far our Lord and his apostles, in the organization of the church,
availed themselves of the synagogue as a model, see Neander, Planting and Training,
28-34. The ministry of the church is without doubt an outgrowth and adaptation of the
eldership of the synagogue. In the synagogue, there were elders who gave themselves
to the study and expounding of the Scriptures. The synagogues held united prayer,
and exercised discipline. They were democratic in government, and independent of
each other. It has sometimes been said that election of officers by the membership of
the church came from the Greek ἐκκλησία, or popular assembly. But Edersheim, Life
and Times of Jesus the Messiah, 1:438, says of the elders of the synagogue that <q>their
election depended on the choice of the congregation.</q> Talmud, Berachob, 55 <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>: <q>No
ruler is appointed over a congregation, unless the congregation is consulted.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Any number of believers, therefore, may constitute themselves into
a Christian church, by adopting for their rule of faith and practice Christ's
law as laid down in the New Testament, and by associating themselves
together, in accordance with it, for his worship and service. It is important,
where practicable, that a council of churches be previously called, to
advise the brethren proposing this union as to the desirableness of constituting
a new and distinct local body; and, if it be found desirable, to
recognize them, after its formation, as being a church of Christ. But such
action of a council, however valuable as affording ground for the fellowship
of other churches, is not constitutive, but is simply declaratory; and,
without such action, the body of believers alluded to, if formed after the
N. T. example, may notwithstanding be a true church of Christ. Still
further, a band of converts, among the heathen or providentially precluded
from access to existing churches, might rightfully appoint one of their
number to baptize the rest, and then might organize, <hi rend='italic'>de novo</hi>, a New
Testament church.
</p>

<pb n='903'/><anchor id='Pg903'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The church at Antioch was apparently self-created and self-directed. There is no
evidence that any human authority, outside of the converts there, was invoked to
constitute or to organize the church. As John Spillsbury put it about 1640: <q>Where
there is a beginning, some must be first.</q> The initiative lies in the individual convert,
and in his duty to obey the commands of Christ. No body of Christians can excuse
itself for disobedience upon the plea that it has no officers. It can elect its own
officers. Councils have no authority to constitute churches. Their work is simply
that of recognizing the already existing organization and of pledging the fellowship of
the churches which they represent. If God can of the stones raise up children unto
Abraham, he can also raise up pastors and teachers from within the company of
believers whom he has converted and saved.
</p>

<p>
Hagenbach, Hist. Doct., 2:294, quotes from Luther, as follows: <q>If a company of
pious Christian laymen were captured and sent to a desert place, and had not among
them an ordained priest, and were all agreed in the matter, and elected one and told
him to baptize, administer the Mass, absolve, and preach, such a one would be as true
a priest as if all the bishops and popes had ordained him.</q> Dexter, Congregationalism,
51&mdash;<q>Luther came near discovering and reproducing Congregationalism. Three
things checked him: 1. he undervalued polity as compared with doctrine; 2. he
reacted from Anabaptist fanaticisms; 3. he thought Providence indicated that princes
should lead and people should follow. So, while he and Zwingle alike held the Bible
to teach that all ecclesiastical power inheres under Christ in the congregation of
believers, the matter ended in an organization of superintendents and consistories,
which gradually became fatally mixed up with the state.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Government of the Church.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Nature of this government in general.</head>

<p>
It is evident from the direct relation of each member of the church, and
so of the church as a whole, to Christ as sovereign and lawgiver, that the
government of the church, so far as regards the source of authority, is an
absolute monarchy.
</p>

<p>
In ascertaining the will of Christ, however, and in applying his commands
to providential exigencies, the Holy Spirit enlightens one member
through the counsel of another, and as the result of combined deliberation,
guides the whole body to right conclusions. This work of the Spirit is
the foundation of the Scripture injunctions to unity. This unity, since it
is a unity of the Spirit, is not an enforced, but an intelligent and willing,
unity. While Christ is sole king, therefore, the government of the church,
so far as regards the interpretation and execution of his will by the body,
is an absolute democracy, in which the whole body of members is intrusted
with the duty and responsibility of carrying out the laws of Christ as
expressed in his word.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The seceders from the established church of Scotland, on the memorable 18th of May,
1843, embodied in their protest the following words: We go out <q>from an establishment
which we loved and prized, through interference with conscience, the dishonor
done to Christ's crown, and the rejection of his sole and supreme authority as King in
his church.</q> The church should be rightly ordered, since it is the representative and
guardian of God's truth&mdash;its <q><hi rend='italic'>pillar and ground</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:15</hi>)&mdash;the Holy Spirit working in
and through it.
</p>

<p>
But it is this very relation of the church to Christ and his truth which renders it
needful to insist upon the right of each member of the church to his private judgment
as to the meaning of Scripture; in other words, absolute monarchy, in this case,
requires for its complement an absolute democracy. President Wayland: <q>No individual
Christian or number of individual Christians, no individual church or number of
individual churches, has original authority, or has power over the whole. None can
add to or subtract from the laws of Christ, or interfere with his direct and absolute
sovereignty over the hearts and lives of his subjects.</q> Each member, as equal to every
<pb n='904'/><anchor id='Pg904'/>
other, has right to a voice in the decisions of the whole body; and no action of the
majority can bind him against his conviction of duty to Christ.
</p>

<p>
John Cotton of Massachusetts Bay, 1643, Questions and Answers: <q>The royal government
of the churches is in Christ, the stewardly or ministerial in the churches themselves.</q>
Cambridge Platform, 1648, 10th chapter&mdash;<q>So far as Christ is concerned,
church government is a monarchy; so far as the brotherhood of the church is concerned,
it resembles a democracy.</q> Unfortunately the Platform goes further and
declares that, in respect of the Presbytery and the Elders' power, it is also an aristocracy.
</p>

<p>
Herbert Spencer and John Stuart Mill, who held diverse views in philosophy, were
once engaged in controversy. While the discussion was running through the press,
Mr. Spencer, forced by lack of funds, announced that he would be obliged to discontinue
the publication of his promised books on science and philosophy. Mr. Mill wrote
him at once, saying that, while he could not agree with him in some things, he realized
that Mr. Spencer's investigations on the whole made for the advance of truth, and so
he himself would be glad to bear the expense of the remaining volumes. Here in the
philosophical world is an example which may well be taken to heart by theologians.
All Christians indeed are bound to respect in others the right of private judgment
while stedfastly adhering themselves to the truth as Christ has made it known to
them.
</p>

<p>
Loyola, founder of the Society of Jesus, dug for each neophyte a grave, and buried
him all but the head, asking him: <q>Art thou dead?</q> When he said: <q>Yes!</q> the General
added: <q>Rise then, and begin to serve, for I want only dead men to serve me.</q>
Jesus, on the other hand, wants only living men to serve him, for he gives life and gives
it abundantly (<hi rend='italic'>John 10:10</hi>). The Salvation Army, in like manner, violates the principle
of sole allegiance to Christ, and like the Jesuits puts the individual conscience and
will under bonds to a human master. Good intentions may at first prevent evil results;
but, since no man can be trusted with absolute power, the ultimate consequence, as in
the case of the Jesuits, will be the enslavement of the subordinate members. Such
autocracy does not find congenial soil in America,&mdash;hence the rebellion of Mr. and
Mrs. Ballington Booth.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. Proof that the government of the church is democratic or congregational.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From the duty of the whole church to preserve unity in its action.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 12:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Be of the same mind one toward another</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now I beseech you ... that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfected together in the same mind and
in the same judgment</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 13:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>be of the same mind</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>giving diligence to keep the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one soul striving for the faith of
the gospel</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 3:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>be ye all likeminded.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
These exhortations to unity are not mere counsels to passive submission, such as
might be given under a hierarchy, or to the members of a society of Jesuits; they are
counsels to coöperation and to harmonious judgment. Each member, while forming
his own opinions under the guidance of the Spirit, is to remember that the other members
have the Spirit also, and that a final conclusion as to the will of God is to be
reached only through comparison of views. The exhortation to unity is therefore an
exhortation to be open-minded, docile, ready to subject our opinions to discussion, to
welcome new light with regard to them, and to give up any opinion when we find it to
be in the wrong. The church is in general to secure unanimity by moral suasion only;
though, in case of wilful and perverse opposition to its decisions, it may be necessary
to secure unity by excluding an obstructive member, for schism.
</p>

<p>
A quiet and peaceful unity is the result of the Holy Spirit's work in the hearts of
Christians. New Testament church government proceeds upon the supposition that
Christ dwells in all believers. Baptist polity is the best possible polity for good people.
Christ has made no provision for an unregenerate church-membership, and for
Satanic possession of Christians. It is best that a church in which Christ does not
dwell should by dissension reveal its weakness, and fall to pieces; and any outward
organization that conceals inward disintegration, and compels a merely formal union
after the Holy Spirit has departed, is a hindrance instead of a help to true religion.
</p>

<p>
Congregationalism is not a strong government to look at. Neither is the solar system.
Its enemies call it a rope of sand. It is rather a rope of iron filings held together by a
magnetic current. Wordsworth: <q>Mightier far Than strength of nerve or sinew, or the
<pb n='905'/><anchor id='Pg905'/>
sway Of magic portent over sun and star, Is love.</q> President Wayland: <q>We do not
need any hoops of iron or steel to hold us together.</q> At high tide all the little pools
along the sea shore are fused together. The unity produced by the inflowing of the
Spirit of Christ is better than any mere external unity, whether of organization or of
creed, whether of Romanism or of Protestantism. The times of the greatest external
unity, as under Hildebrand, were times of the church's deepest moral corruption. A
revival of religion is a better cure for church quarrels than any change in church
organization could effect. In the early church, though there was no common government,
unity was promoted by active intercourse. Hospitality, regular delegates, itinerant
apostles and prophets, apostolic and other epistles, still later the gospels, persecution,
and even heresy, promoted unity&mdash;heresy compelling the exclusion of the
unworthy and factious elements in the Christian community.
</p>

<p>
Dr. F. J. A. Hort, The Christian Ecclesia: <q>Not a word in the Epistle to the Ephesians
exhibits the one <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ecclesia</foreign> as made up of many <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ecclesiæ</foreign>.... The members which make
up the one <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ecclesia</foreign> are not communities, but individual men.... The unity of the
universal <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ecclesia</foreign> ... is a truth of theology and religion, not a fact of what we call
ecclesiastical politics.... The <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ecclesia</foreign> itself, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, the sum of all its male members, is
the primary body, and, it would seem, even the primary authority.... Of officers
higher than elders we find nothing that points to an institution or system, nothing like
the Episcopal system of later times.... The monarchical principle receives practical
though limited recognition in the position ultimately held by St. James at Jerusalem,
and in the temporary functions entrusted by St. Paul to Timothy and Titus.</q> On this
last statement Bartlett, in Contemp. Rev., July, 1897, says that James held an unique
position as brother of our Lord, while Paul left the communities organized by Timothy
and Titus to govern themselves, when once their organization was set agoing. There
was no permanent diocesan episcopate, in which one man presided over many churches.
The <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ecclesiæ</foreign> had for their officers only bishops and deacons.
</p>

<p>
Should not the majority rule in a Baptist church? No, not a bare majority, when there
are opposing convictions on the part of a large minority. What should rule is the mind
of the Spirit. What indicates his mind is the gradual unification of conviction and
opinion on the part of the whole body in support of some definite plan, so that the
whole church moves together. The large church has the advantage over the small
church in that the single crotchety member cannot do so much harm. One man in a
small boat can easily upset it, but not so in the great ship. Patient waiting, persuasion,
and prayer, will ordinarily win over the recalcitrant. It is not to be denied, however,
that patience may have its limits, and that unity may sometimes need to be purchased
by secession and the forming of a new local church whose members can work harmoniously
together.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From the responsibility of the whole church for maintaining pure
doctrine and practice.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jude 3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>exhorting you to
contend earnestly for the faith which was once for all delivered unto the saints</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 2</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>3</hi>&mdash;exhortations to
the seven churches of Asia to maintain pure doctrine and practice. In all these passages,
pastoral charges are given, not by a so-called bishop to his subordinate priests,
but by an apostle to the whole church and to all its members.
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:15</hi>, Dr. Hort would translate <q><hi rend='italic'>a pillar and ground of the truth</hi></q>&mdash;apparently referring
to the local church as one of many. <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 3:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>strong to apprehend with all saints what is the
breadth and length and height and depth.</hi></q> Edith Wharton, Vesalius in Zante, in N. A. Rev., Nov.
1892&mdash;<q>Truth is many-tongued. What one man failed to speak, another finds Another
word for. May not all converge, In some vast utterance of which you and I, Fallopius,
were but the halting syllables?</q> Bruce, Training of the Twelve, shows that the
Twelve probably knew the whole O. T. by heart. Pandita Ramabai, at Oxford, when
visiting Max Müller, recited from the Rig Veda <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>, and showed that she knew
more of it by heart than the whole contents of the O. T.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) From the committing of the ordinances to the charge of the whole
church to observe and guard. As the church expresses truth in her teaching,
so she is to express it in symbol through the ordinances.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19, 20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Go ye therefore, and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them ... teaching them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 24:33</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And they rose up that very hour ... found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with
<pb n='906'/><anchor id='Pg906'/>
them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 1:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And in these days Peter stood up in the midst of the brethren, and said (and there was a multitude
of persons gathered together, about a hundred and twenty)</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>then he appeared to above five
hundred brethren at once</hi></q>&mdash;these passages show that it was not to the eleven apostles alone
that Jesus committed the ordinances.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now I praise you that ye remember me in all things, and hold fast the traditions, even as I delivered
them to you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>23, 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>for I received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus in the
night in which he was betrayed took bread; and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, This is my body,
which is for you: this do in remembrance of me</hi></q>&mdash;here Paul commits the Lord's Supper into the
charge, not of the body of officials, but of the whole church. Baptism and the Lord's
Supper, therefore, are not to be administered at the discretion of the individual minister.
He is simply the organ of the church; and pocket baptismal and communion
services are without warrant. See Curtis, Progress of Baptist Principles, 299; Robinson,
Harmony of Gospels, notes, § 170.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) From the election by the whole church, of its own officers and delegates.
In Acts 14:23, the literal interpretation of χειροτονήσαντες is not to
be pressed. In Titus 1:5, <q>when Paul empowers Titus to set presiding
officers over the communities, this circumstance decides nothing as to the
mode of choice, nor is a choice by the community itself thereby necessarily
excluded.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 1:23, 26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And they put forward two ... and they gave lots for them; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and
he was numbered with the eleven apostles</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>6:3, 5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Look ye out therefore, brethren, from among you seven men of
good report ... And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, ... and Philip, and Prochorus,
and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolaus</hi></q>&mdash;as deacons; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 13:2, 3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And as they
ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have
called them. Then, when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them, they sent them away.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
On this passage, see Meyer's comment: <q><q><emph>Ministered</emph></q> here expresses the act of celebrating
divine service on the part of the whole church. To refer αὐτῶν to the <q><hi rend='italic'>prophets and
teachers</hi></q> is forbidden by the ἀφορίσατε&mdash;and by <hi rend='italic'>verse 3</hi>. This interpretation would confine
this most important mission-act to five persons, of whom two were the missionaries
sent; and the church would have had no part in it, even through its presbyters. This
agrees, neither with the common possession of the Spirit in the apostolic church, nor
with the concrete cases of the choice of an apostle (<hi rend='italic'>ch. 1</hi>) and of deacons (<hi rend='italic'>ch. 6</hi>). Compare
<hi rend='italic'>14:27</hi>, where the returned missionaries report to the church. The imposition of
hands (<hi rend='italic'>verse 3</hi>) is by the presbyters, as representatives of the whole church. The subject
in <hi rend='italic'>verses 2</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>3</hi> is <q><hi rend='italic'>the church</hi></q>&mdash;(represented by the presbyters in this case). The church
sends the missionaries to the heathen, and consecrates them through its elders.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 15:2, 4, 22, 30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the brethren appointed that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go up to
Jerusalem.... And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the church and the apostles and the
elders.... Then it seemed good to the apostles and the elders, with the whole church, to choose men out of their
company, and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas.... So they ... came down to Antioch; and having
gathered the multitude together, they delivered the epistle</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 8:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who was also appointed by the churches
to travel with us in the matter of this grace</hi></q>&mdash;the contribution for the poor in Jerusalem; <hi rend='italic'>Acts
14:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And when they had appointed</hi> (χειροτονήσαντες) <hi rend='italic'>for them elders in every church</hi></q>&mdash;the apostles
announced the election of the church, as a College President confers degrees, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, by
announcing degrees conferred by the Board of Trustees. To this same effect witnesses
the newly discovered Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, chapter 15: <q>Appoint therefore
for yourselves bishops and deacons.</q>
</p>

<p>
The derivation of χειροτονήσαντες, holding up of hands, as in a popular vote, is not to be
pressed, any more than is the derivation of ἐκκλησία from καλέω. The former had come
to mean simply <q>to appoint,</q> without reference to the manner of appointment, as the
latter had come to mean an <q>assembly,</q> without reference to the calling of its members
by God. That the church at Antioch <q><emph>separated</emph></q> Paul and Barnabas, and that
this was not done simply by the five persons mentioned, is shown by the fact that,
when Paul and Barnabas returned from the missionary journey, they reported not to
these five, but to the whole church. So when the church at Antioch sent delegates to
Jerusalem, the letter of the Jerusalem church is thus addressed: <q><hi rend='italic'>The apostles and the elders,
brethren, unto the brethren who are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 15:23</hi>). The Twelve
had only spiritual authority. They could advise, but they did not command. Hence
they could not transmit government, since they had it not. They could demand obedience,
only as they convinced their hearers that their word was truth. It was not they
who commanded, but their Master.
</p>

<pb n='907'/><anchor id='Pg907'/>

<p>
Hackett, Com. on Acts&mdash;<q>χειροτονησαντες is not to be pressed, since Paul and Barnabas
constitute the persons ordaining. It may possibly indicate a concurrent appointment,
in accordance with the usual practice of universal suffrage; but the burden of proof
lies on those who would so modify the meaning of the verb. The word is frequently
used in the sense of choosing, appointing, with reference to the formality of raising
the hand.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>: <q>The church officers were elective. As
appears from analogy of <hi rend='italic'>6:2-6</hi> (election of deacons), the word χειροτονήσαντες retains
its etymological sense, and does not mean <q>constituted</q> or <q>created.</q> Their choice was
a recognition of a gift already bestowed,&mdash;not the ground of the office and source of
authority, but merely the means by which the gift becomes [known, recognized, and]
an actual office in the church.</q>
</p>

<p>
Baumgarten, Apostolic History, 1:456&mdash;<q>They&mdash;the two apostles&mdash;allow presbyters
to be chosen for the community by voting.</q> Alexander, Com. on Acts&mdash;<q>The method
of election here, as the expression χειροτονήσαντες indicates, was the same as that in <hi rend='italic'>Acts
6:5, 6</hi>, where the people chose the seven, and the twelve ordained them.</q> Barnes, Com.
on Acts: <q>The apostles presided in the assembly where the choice was made,&mdash;appointed
them in the usual way by the suffrage of the people.</q> Dexter, Congregationalism,
138&mdash;<q><q><emph>Ordained</emph></q> means here <q>prompted and secured the election</q> of elders in
every church.</q> So in <hi rend='italic'>Titus 1:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>appoint elders in every city.</hi></q> Compare the Latin: <q>dictator
consules creavit</q> = prompted and secured the election of consuls by the people. See
Neander, Church History, 1:189; Guericke, Church History, 1:110; Meyer, on <hi rend='italic'>Acts 13:2</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The Watchman, Nov. 7, 1901&mdash;<q>The root-difficulty with many schemes of statecraft
is to be found in deep-seated distrust of the capacities and possibilities of men. Wendell
Phillips once said that nothing so impressed him with the power of the gospel to
solve our problems as the sight of a prince and a peasant kneeling side by side in a
European Cathedral.</q> Dr. W. R. Huntington makes the strong points of Congregationalism
to be: 1. a lofty estimate of the value of trained intelligence in the Christian
ministry; 2. a clear recognition of the duty of every lay member of a church to take an
active interest in its affairs, temporal as well as spiritual. He regards the weaknesses of
Congregationalism to be: 1. a certain incapacity for expansion beyond the territorial
limits within which it is indigenous; 2. an undervaluation of the mystical or sacramental,
as contrasted with the doctrinal and practical sides of religion. He argues for
the object-symbolism as well as the verbal-symbolism of the real presence and grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Dread of idolatry, he thinks, should not make us indifferent to
the value of sacraments. Baptists, we reply, may fairly claim that they escape both of
these charges against ordinary Congregationalism, in that they have shown unlimited
capacity of expansion, and in that they make very much of the symbolism of the
ordinances.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) From the power of the whole church to exercise discipline. Passages
which show the right of the whole body to exclude, show also the
right of the whole body to admit, members.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And if he refuse to hear them, tell it unto the church: and if he refuse to hear the church also, let
him be unto thee as the Gentile and the publican. Verily I say unto you, What things soever ye shall bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven; and what things soever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven</hi></q>&mdash;words often
inscribed over Roman Catholic confessionals, but improperly, since they refer not to
the decisions of a single priest, but to the decisions of the whole body of believers
guided by the Holy Spirit. In <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:17</hi>, quoted above, we see that the church has
authority, that it is bound to take cognizance of offences, and that its action is final.
If there had been in the mind of our Lord any other than a democratic form of government,
he would have referred the aggrieved party to pastor, priest, or presbytery, and,
in case of a wrong decision by the church, would have mentioned some synod or
assembly to which the aggrieved person might appeal. But he throws all the responsibility
upon the whole body of believers. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Num. 15:35</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>all the congregation shall stone him
with stones</hi></q>&mdash;the man who gathered sticks on the Sabbath day. Every Israelite was to
have part in the execution of the penalty.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 5:4, 5, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye being gathered together ... to deliver such a one unto Satan.... Put away the
wicked man from among yourselves</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 2:6, 7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Sufficient to such a one is this punishment which was inflicted
by the many; so that contrariwise ye should rather forgive him and comfort him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>7:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For behold, this selfsame
thing ... what earnest care it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of yourselves.... In every thing ye
approved yourselves to be pure in the matter</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 3:6, 14, 15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>withdraw yourselves from every brother that
<pb n='908'/><anchor id='Pg908'/>
walketh disorderly ... if any man obeyeth not our word by this epistle, note that man, that ye have no company
with him, to the end that he may be ashamed. And yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.</hi></q>
The evils in the church at Corinth were such as could exist only in a democratic body,
and Paul does not enjoin upon the church a change of government, but a change of
heart. Paul does not himself excommunicate the incestuous man, but he urges the
church to excommunicate him.
</p>

<p>
The educational influence upon the whole church of this election of pastors and
deacons, choosing of delegates, admission and exclusion of members, management of
church finance and general conduct of business, carrying on of missionary operations
and raising of contributions, together with responsibility for correct doctrine and
practice, cannot be overestimated. The whole body can know those who apply for
admission, better than pastors or elders can. To put the whole government of the
church into the hands of a few is to deprive the membership of one great means of
Christian training and progress. Hence the pastor's duty is to develop the self-government
of the church. The missionary should not command, but advise. That minister
is most successful who gets the whole body to move, and who renders the church independent
of himself. The test of his work is not while he is with them, but after he
leaves them. Then it can be seen whether he has taught them to follow him, or to
follow Christ; whether he has led them to the formation of habits of independent
Christian activity, or whether he has made them passively dependent upon himself.
</p>

<p>
It should be the ambition of the pastor not <q>to run the church,</q> but to teach the
church intelligently and Scripturally to manage its own affairs. The word <q>minister</q>
means, not master, but servant. The true pastor inspires, but he does not drive. He
is like the trusty mountain guide, who carries a load thrice as heavy as that of the
man he serves, who leads in safe paths and points out dangers, but who neither shouts
nor compels obedience. The individual Christian should be taught: 1. to realize the
privilege of church membership; 2. to fit himself to use his privilege; 3. to exercise
his rights as a church member; 4. to glory in the New Testament system of church
government, and to defend and propagate it.
</p>

<p>
A Christian pastor can either rule, or he can have the reputation of ruling; but he
can not do both. Real ruling involves a sinking of self, a working through others, a
doing of nothing that some one else can be got to do. The reputation of ruling leads
sooner or later to the loss of real influence, and to the decline of the activities of the
church itself. See Coleman, Manual of Prelacy and Ritualism, 87-125; and on the
advantages of Congregationalism over every other form of church-polity, see Dexter,
Congregationalism, 236-296. Dexter, 290, note, quotes from Belcher's Religious Denominations
of the U. S., 184, as follows: <q>Jefferson said that he considered Baptist church
government the only form of pure democracy which then existed in the world, and
had concluded that it would be the best plan of government for the American Colonies.
This was eight or ten years before the American Revolution.</q> On Baptist democracy,
see Thomas Armitage, in N. Amer. Rev., March, 1887:232-243.
</p>

<p>
John Fiske, Beginnings of New England: <q>In a church based upon such a theology
[that of Calvin], there was no room for prelacy. Each single church tended to become
an independent congregation of worshipers, constituting one of the most effective
schools that has ever existed for training men in local self-government.</q> Schurman,
Agnosticism, 160&mdash;<q>The Baptists, who are nominally Calvinists, are now, as they were
at the beginning of the century, second in numerical rank [in America]; but their
fundamental principle&mdash;the Bible, the Bible only&mdash;taken in connection with their
polity, has enabled them silently to drop the old theology and unconsciously to adjust
themselves to the new spiritual environment.</q> We prefer to say that Baptists have
not dropped the old theology, but have given it new interpretation and application;
see A. H. Strong, Our Denominational Outlook, Sermon in Cleveland, 1904.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. Erroneous views as to church government refuted by the foregoing
passages.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The world-church theory, or the Romanist view.&mdash;This holds that
all local churches are subject to the supreme authority of the bishop of
Rome, as the successor of Peter and the infallible vicegerent of Christ,
and, as thus united, constitute the one and only church of Christ on earth.
We reply:
</p>

<pb n='909'/><anchor id='Pg909'/>

<p>
First,&mdash;Christ gave no such supreme authority to Peter. Mat. 16:18, 19,
simply refers to the personal position of Peter as first confessor of Christ
and preacher of his name to Jews and Gentiles. Hence other apostles
also constituted the foundation (Eph. 2:20; Rev. 21:14). On one occasion,
the counsel of James was regarded as of equal weight with that of
Peter (Acts 15:7-30), while on another occasion Peter was rebuked by Paul
(Gal. 2:11), and Peter calls himself only a fellow-elder (1 Pet. 5:1).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 16:18, 19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I also say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the
gates of Hades shall not prevail against it. I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever
thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.</hi></q>
Peter exercised this power of the keys for both Jews and Gentiles, by being the first
to preach Christ to them, and so admit them to the kingdom of heaven. The <q><emph>rock</emph></q> is
a confessing heart. The confession of Christ makes Peter a rock upon which the
church can be built. Plumptre on Epistles of Peter, Introd., 14&mdash;<q>He was a stone&mdash;one
with that rock with which he was now joined by an indissoluble union.</q> But
others come to be associated with him: <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>built upon the foundation of the apostles and
prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief corner stone</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the wall of the city had twelve
foundations, and on them twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 15:7-30</hi>&mdash;the Council of
Jerusalem. <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 2:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But when Cephas came to Antioch, I resisted him to the face, because he stood condemned</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 5:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The elders therefore among you I exhort, who am a fellow-elder.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Here it should be remembered that three things were necessary to constitute an
apostle: (1) he must have seen Christ after his resurrection, so as to be a witness to the
fact that Christ had risen from the dead; (2) he must be a worker of miracles, to
certify that he was Christ's messenger; (3) he must be an inspired teacher of Christ's
truth, so that his final utterances are the very word of God. In <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 16:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Salute Andronicus
and Junias, my kinsmen, and my fellow-prisoners, who are of note among the apostles</hi></q> means simply:
<q>who are highly esteemed among, or by, the apostles.</q> Barnabas is called an apostle,
in the etymological sense of a messenger: <hi rend='italic'>Acts 13:2, 3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them. Then, when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them, they sent them
away</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 3:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, even Jesus.</hi></q> In this latter sense,
the number of the apostles was not limited to twelve.
</p>

<p>
Protestants err in denying the reference in <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 16:18</hi> to Peter; Christ recognizes
Peter's <emph>personality</emph> in the founding of his kingdom. But Romanists equally err in
ignoring Peter's <emph>confession</emph> as constituting him the <q><emph>rock</emph>.</q> Creeds and confessions alone
will never convert the world; they need to be embodied in living personalities in
order to save; this is the grain of correct doctrine in Romanism. On the other hand,
men without a faith, which they are willing to confess at every cost, will never convert
the world; there must be a substance of doctrine with regard to sin, and with
regard to Christ as the divine Savior from sin; this is the just contention of Protestantism.
Baptist doctrine combines the merits of both systems. It has both personality
and confession. It is not hierarchical, but experiential. It insists, not upon
abstractions, but upon life. Truth without a body is as powerless as a body without
truth. A flag without an army is even worse than an army without a flag. Phillips
Brooks: <q>The truth of God working through the personality of man has been the
salvation of the world.</q> Pascal: <q>Catholicism is a church without a religion; Protestantism
is a religion without a church.</q> Yes, we reply, if church means hierarchy.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Secondly,&mdash;If Peter had such authority given him, there is no evidence
that he had power to transmit it to others.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Fisher, Hist. Christian Church, 247&mdash;<q>William of Occam (1280-1347) composed a
treatise on the power of the pope. He went beyond his predecessors in arguing that
the church, since it has its unity in Christ, is not under the necessity of being subject
to a single primate. He placed the Emperor and the General Council above the
pope, as his judges. In matters of faith he would not allow infallibility even to the
General Councils. <q>Only Holy Scripture and the beliefs of the universal church are of
absolute validity.</q></q> W. Rauschenbusch, in The Examiner, July 28, 1892&mdash;<q>The age
of an ecclesiastical organization, instead of being an argument in its favor, is presumptive
evidence against it, because all bodies organized for moral or religious ends manifest
such a frightful inclination to become corrupt.... Marks of the true church
<pb n='910'/><anchor id='Pg910'/>
are: present spiritual power, loyalty to Jesus, an unworldly morality, seeking and
saving the lost, self-sacrifice and self-crucifixion.</q>
</p>

<p>
Romanism holds to a transmitted infallibility. The pope is infallible: 1. when he
speaks as pope; 2. when he speaks for the whole church; 3. when he defines doctrine,
or passes a final judgment; 4. when the doctrine thus defined is within the sphere of
faith or morality; see Brandis, in N. A. Rev., Dec. 1892: 654. Schurman, Belief in God,
114&mdash;<q>Like the Christian pope, Zeus is conceived in the Homeric poems to be fallible
as an individual, but infallible as head of the sacred convocation. The other gods are
only his representatives and executives.</q> But, even if the primacy of the Roman pontiff
were acknowledged, there would still be abundant proof that he is not infallible.
The condemnation of the letters of Pope Honorius, acknowledging monothelism and
ordering it to be preached, by Pope Martin I and the first Council of Lateran in 649,
shows that both could not be right. Yet both were <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedra</foreign> utterances, one denying
what the other affirmed. Perrone concedes that only one error committed by a pope in
an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedra</foreign> announcement would be fatal to the doctrine of papal infallibility.
</p>

<p>
Martineau, Seat of Authority, 139, 140, gives instances of papal inconsistencies and
contradictions, and shows that Roman Catholicism does not answer to either one of its
four notes or marks of a true church, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: 1. unity; 2. sanctity; 3. universality; 4.
apostolicity. Dean Stanley had an interview with Pope Pius IX, and came away saying
that the infallible man had made more blunders in a twenty minutes' conversation than
any person he had ever met. Dr. Fairbairn facetiously defines infallibility, as <q>inability
to detect errors even where they are most manifest.</q> He speaks of <q>the folly of the men
who think they hold God in their custody, and distribute him to whomsoever they will.</q>
The Pope of Rome can no more trace his official descent from Peter than Alexander
the Great could trace his personal descent from Jupiter.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thirdly,&mdash;There is no conclusive evidence that Peter ever was at Rome,
much less that he was bishop of Rome.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Clement of Rome refers to Peter as a martyr, but he makes no claim for Rome as the
place of his martyrdom. The tradition that Peter preached at Rome and founded a
church there dates back only to Dionysius of Corinth and Irenæus of Lyons, who did
not write earlier than the eighth decade of the second century, or more than a hundred
years after Peter's death. Professor Lepsius of Jena submitted the Roman tradition to
a searching examination, and came to the conclusion that Peter was never in Italy.
</p>

<p>
A. A. Hodge, in Princetoniana, 129&mdash;<q>Three unproved assumptions: 1. that Peter
was primate; 2. that Peter was bishop of Rome; 3. that Peter was primate <emph>and</emph> bishop
of Rome. The last is not unimportant; because Clement, for instance, might have
succeeded to the bishopric of Rome without the primacy; as Queen Victoria came to
the crown of England, but not to that of Hanover. Or, to come nearer home, Ulysses
S. Grant was president of the United States and husband of Mrs. Grant. Mr. Hayes
succeeded him, but not in both capacities!</q>
</p>

<p>
On the question whether Peter founded the Roman Church, see Meyer, Com. on
Romans, transl., vol. 1:23&mdash;<q>Paul followed the principle of not interfering with another
apostle's field of labor. Hence Peter could not have been laboring at Rome, at the time
when Paul wrote his epistle to the Romans from Ephesus; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 19:21; Rom. 15:20; 2 Cor.
10:16.</hi></q> Meyer thinks Peter was martyred at Rome, but that he did not found the Roman
church, the origin of which is unknown. <q>The Epistle to the Romans,</q> he says, <q>since
Peter cannot have labored at Rome before it was written, is a fact destructive of the
historical basis of the Papacy</q> (p. 28). See also Elliott, Horæ Apocalypticæ, 3:560.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Fourthly,&mdash;There is no evidence that he really did so appoint the bishops
of Rome as his successors.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Denney, Studies in Theology, 191&mdash;<q>The church was first the company of those
united to Christ and living in Christ; then it became a society based on creed; finally
a society based on clergy.</q> A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 130&mdash;<q>The Holy Spirit
is the real <q>Vicar of Christ.</q> Would any one desire to find the clue to the great apostasy
whose dark eclipse now covers two thirds of nominal Christendom, here it is: The
rule and authority of the Holy Spirit ignored in the church; the servants of the house
assuming mastery and encroaching more and more on the prerogatives of the Head,
till at last one man sets himself up as the administrator of the church, and daringly
usurps the name of the Vicar of Christ.</q> See also R. V. Littledale, The Petrine Claims.
</p>

<pb n='911'/><anchor id='Pg911'/>

<p>
The secret of Baptist success and progress is in putting truth before unity. <hi rend='italic'>James 3:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the
wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable.</hi></q> The substitution of external for internal
unity, of which the apostolic succession, so called, is a sign and symbol, is of a piece
with the whole sacramental scheme of salvation. Men cannot be brought into the
kingdom of heaven, nor can they be made good ministers of Jesus Christ, by priestly
manipulation. The Frankish wholesale conversion of races, the Jesuitical putting of
obedience instead of life, the identification of the church with the nation, are all false
methods of diffusing Christianity. The claims of Rome need irrefragible proof, if they
are to be accepted. But they have no warrant in Scripture or in history. Methodist
Review: <q>As long as the Bible is recognized to be authoritative, the church will face
Romeward as little as Leo X will visit America to attend a Methodist campmeeting, or
Justin D. Fulton be elected as his successor in the Papal chair.</q> See Gore, Incarnation,
208, 209.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Fifthly,&mdash;If Peter did so appoint the bishops of Rome, the evidence of
continuous succession since that time is lacking.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On the weakness of the argument for apostolic succession, see remarks with regard
to the national church theory, below. Dexter, Congregationalism, 715&mdash;<q>To spiritualize
and evangelize Romanism, or High Churchism, will be to Congregationalize it.</q>
If all the Roman Catholics who have come to America had remained Roman Catholics,
there would be sixteen millions of them, whereas there are actually only eight millions.
If it be said that the remainder have no religion, we reply that they have just as much
religion as they had before. American democracy has freed them from the domination
of the priest, but it has not deprived them of anything but external connection with a
corrupt church. It has given them opportunity for the first time to come in contact
with the church of the New Testament, and to accept the offer of salvation through
simple faith in Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
<q>Romanism,</q> says Dorner, <q>identifies the church and the kingdom of God. The professedly
perfect hierarchy is itself the church, or its essence.</q> Yet Moehler, the greatest
modern advocate of the Romanist system, himself acknowledges that there were popes
before the Reformation <q>whom hell has swallowed up</q>; see Dorner, Hist. Prot. Theol.,
Introd., <hi rend='italic'>ad finem</hi>. If the Romanist asks: <q>Where was your church before Luther?</q>
the Protestant may reply: <q>Where was your face this morning before it was washed?</q>
Disciples of Christ have sometimes kissed the feet of Antichrist, but it recalls an ancient
story. When an Athenian noble thus, in old times, debased himself to the King of Persia,
his fellow-citizens at Athens doomed him to death. See Coleman, Manual on Prelacy
and Ritualism, 265-274; Park, in Bib. Sac., 2:451; Princeton Rev., Apr., 1876:265.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Sixthly,&mdash;There is abundant evidence that a hierarchical form of church
government is corrupting to the church and dishonoring to Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 131-140&mdash;<q>Catholic writers claim that the Pope,
as the Vicar of Christ, is the only mouthpiece of the Holy Ghost. But the Spirit has
been given to the church as a whole, that is, to the body of regenerated believers, and
to every member of that body according to his measure. The sin of sacerdotalism is,
that it arrogates for a usurping few that which belongs to every member of Christ's
mystical body. It is a suggestive fact that the name κλῆρος, <q><hi rend='italic'>the charge allotted to you</hi>,</q> which
Peter gives to the church as <q><hi rend='italic'>the flock of God</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 5:2</hi>), when warning the elders against
being lords over God's heritage, now appears in ecclesiastical usage as 'the clergy,'
with its orders of pontiff and prelates and lord bishops, whose appointed function it is
to exercise lordship over Christ's flock.... But committees and majorities may take
the place of the Spirit, just as perfectly as a pope or a bishop.... This is the reason
why the light has been extinguished in many a candlestick.... The body remains,
but the breath is withdrawn. The Holy Spirit is the only Administrator.</q>
</p>

<p>
Canon Melville: <q>Make peace if you will with Popery, receive it into your Senate,
enshrine it in your chambers, plant it in your hearts. But be ye certain, as certain as
there is a heaven above you and a God over you, that the Popery thus honored and
embraced is the Popery that was loathed and degraded by the holiest of your fathers;
and the same in haughtiness, the same in intolerance, which lorded it over kings,
assumed the prerogative of Deity, crushed human liberty, and slew the saints of God.</q>
On the strength and weakness of Romanism, see Harnack, What is Christianity? 246-263.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='912'/><anchor id='Pg912'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The national-church theory, or the theory of provincial or national
churches.&mdash;This holds that all members of the church in any province or
nation are bound together in provincial or national organization, and that
this organization has jurisdiction over the local churches. We reply:
</p>

<p>
First,&mdash;the theory has no support in the Scriptures. There is no evidence
that the word ἐκκλησία in the New Testament ever means a national
church organization. 1 Cor. 12:28, Phil. 3:6, and 1 Tim. 3:15, may be
more naturally interpreted as referring to the generic church. In Acts 9:31,
ἐκκλησία is a mere generalization for the local churches then and there
existing, and implies no sort of organization among them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, then miracles,
then gifts of healings, helps, governments, divers kinds of tongues</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as touching zeal, persecuting the
church</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that thou mayest know how men ought to behave themselves in the house of God, which is
the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 9:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>So the church throughout all Judæa and
Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified.</hi></q> For advocacy of the Presbyterian system, see Cunningham,
Historical Theology, 2:514-556; McPherson, Presbyterianism. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>,
see Jacob, Eccl. Polity of N. T., 9&mdash;<q>There is no example of a national church in the
New Testament.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Secondly,&mdash;It is contradicted by the intercourse which the New Testament
churches held with each other as independent bodies,&mdash;for example
at the Council of Jerusalem (Acts. 15:1-35).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 15:2, 6, 13, 19, 22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the brethren appointed that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go up to
Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this question.... And the apostles and the elders were gathered together
to consider of this matter.... James answered ... my judgment is, that we trouble not them that from among the
Gentiles turn to God ... it seemed good to the apostles and the elders, with the whole church, to choose men out of
their company, and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
McGiffert, Apostolic Church, 645&mdash;<q>The steps of developing organization were: 1.
Recognition of the teaching of the apostles as exclusive standard and norm of Christian
truth; 2. Confinement to a specific office, the Catholic office of bishop, of the power to
determine what is the teaching of the apostles; 3. Designation of a specific institution,
the Catholic church, as the sole channel of divine grace. The Twelve, in the church of
Jerusalem, had only a purely spiritual authority. They could advise, but they did not
command. Hence they were not qualified to transmit authority to others. They had
no absolute authority themselves.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thirdly,&mdash;It has no practical advantages over the Congregational polity,
but rather tends to formality, division, and the extinction of the principles
of self-government and direct responsibility to Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
E. G. Robinson: <q>The Anglican schism is the most sectarian of all the sects.</q> Principal
Rainey thus describes the position of the Episcopal Church: <q>They will not
recognize the church standing of those who recognize them; and they only recognize
the church standing of those, Greeks and Latins, who do not recognize them. Is not
that an odd sort of Catholicity?</q> <q>Every priestling hides a popeling.</q> The elephant
going through the jungle saw a brood of young partridges that had just lost their
mother. Touched with sympathy he said: <q>I will be a mother to you,</q> and so he sat
down upon them, as he had seen their mother do. Hence we speak of the <q>incumbent</q>
of such and such a parish.
</p>

<p>
There were no councils that claimed authority till the second century, and the independence
of the churches was not given up until the third or fourth century. In Bp.
Lightfoot's essay on the Christian Ministry, in the appendix to his Com. on Philippians,
progress to episcopacy is thus described: <q>In the time of Ignatius, the bishop, then
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primus inter pares</foreign>, was regarded only as a centre of unity; in the time of Irenæus, as
a depositary of primitive truth; in the time of Cyprian, as absolute vicegerent of Christ
in things spiritual.</q> Nothing is plainer than the steady degeneration of church polity
in the hands of the Fathers. Archibald Alexander: <q>A better name than Church
Fathers for these men would be church babies. Their theology was infantile.</q> Luther:
<q>Never mind the Scribes,&mdash;what saith the Scripture?</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='913'/><anchor id='Pg913'/>

<p>
Fourthly,&mdash;It is inconsistent with itself, in binding a professedly spiritual
church by formal and geographical lines.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Instance the evils of Presbyterianism in practice. Dr. Park says that <q>the split
between the Old and the New School was due to an attempt on the part of the majority
to impose their will on the minority.... The Unitarian defection in New England
would have ruined Presbyterian churches, but it did not ruin Congregational churches.
A Presbyterian church may be deprived of the minister it has chosen, by the votes of
neighboring churches, or by the few leading men who control them, or by one single
vote in a close contest.</q> We may illustrate by the advantage of the adjustable card-catalogue
over the old method of keeping track of books in a library.
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 137, note&mdash;<q>By the candlesticks in the Revelation
being seven, instead of one as in the tabernacle, we are taught that whereas, in the
Jewish dispensation, God's visible church was one, in the Gentile dispensation there
are many visible churches, and that Christ himself recognizes them alike</q> (quoted
from Garratt, Com. on Rev., 32). Bishop Moule, Veni Creator, 131, after speaking of
the unity of the Spirit, goes on to say: <q>Blessed will it be for the church and for the
world when these principles shall so vastly prevail as to find expression from within
in a harmonious counterpart of order; a far different thing from what is, I cannot but
think, an illusory prospect&mdash;the attainment of such internal unity by a previous
exaction of exterior governmental uniformity.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Fifthly,&mdash;It logically leads to the theory of Romanism. If two churches
need a superior authority to control them and settle their differences, then
two countries and two hemispheres need a common ecclesiastical government,&mdash;and
a world-church, under one visible head, is Romanism.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Hatch, in his Bampton Lectures on Organization of Early Christian Churches, without
discussing the evidence from the New Testament, proceeds to treat of the post-apostolic
development of organization, as if the existence of a germinal Episcopacy
very soon <emph>after</emph> the apostles proved such a system to be legitimate or obligatory. In
reply, we would ask whether we are under moral obligation to conform to whatever
succeeds in developing itself. If so, then the priests of Baal, as well as the priests of
Rome, had just claims to human belief and obedience. Prof. Black: <q>We have no
objection to antiquity, if they will only go back far enough. We wish to listen, not
only to the fathers of the church, but also to the grandfathers.</q>
</p>

<p>
Phillips Brooks speaks of <q>the fantastic absurdity of apostolic succession.</q> And
with reason, for in the Episcopal system, bishops qualified to ordain must be: (1) baptized
persons; (2) not scandalously immoral; (3) not having obtained office by bribery;
(4) must not have been deposed. In view of these qualifications, Archbishop Whately
pronounces the doctrine of apostolic succession untenable, and declares that <q>there is
no Christian minister existing now, who can trace up with complete certainty his own
ordination, through perfectly regular steps, to the time of the apostles.</q> See Macaulay's
Review of Gladstone on Church and State, in his Essays, 4:166-178. There are breaks in
the line, and a chain is only as strong as its weakest part. See Presb. Rev., 1886:89-126.
Mr. Flanders called Phillips Brooks <q>an Episcopalian with leanings toward Christianity.</q>
Bishop Brooks replied that he could not be angry with <q>such a dear old moth-eaten
angel.</q> On apostolic succession, see C. Anderson Scott, Evangelical Doctrine,
37-48, 267-288.
</p>

<p>
Apostolic succession has been called the pipe-line conception of divine grace. To
change the figure, it may be compared to the monopoly of communication with Europe
by the submarine cable. But we are not confined to the pipe-line or to the cable. There
are wells of salvation in our private grounds, and wireless telegraphy practicable to
every human soul, apart from any control of corporations.
</p>

<p>
We see leanings toward the world-church idea in Pananglican and Panpresbyterian
Councils. Human nature ever tends to substitute the unity of external organization
for the spiritual unity which belongs to all believers in Christ. There is no necessity
for common government, whether Presbyterian or Episcopal; since Christ's truth and
Spirit are competent to govern all as easily as one. It is a remarkable fact, that the
Baptist denomination, without external bonds, has maintained a greater unity in doctrine,
and a closer general conformity to New Testament standards, than the churches
which adopt the principle of episcopacy, or of provincial organization. With Abp.
Whately, we find the true symbol of Christian unity in <q><hi rend='italic'>the tree of life, bearing twelve manner of
<pb n='914'/><anchor id='Pg914'/>
fruits</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 22:2</hi>). <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>John 10:16</hi>&mdash;γενήσονται μία ποίμνη, εἶς ποιμήν&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they shall become one flock, one
shepherd</hi></q> = not one fold, not external unity, but one flock in many folds. See Jacob,
Eccl. Polity of N. T., 130; Dexter, Congregationalism, 236; Coleman, Manual on Prelacy
and Ritualism, 128-264; Albert Barnes, Apostolic Church.
</p>

<p>
As testimonies to the adequacy of Baptist polity to maintain sound doctrine, we quote
from the Congregationalist, Dr. J. L. Withrow: <q>There is not a denomination of
evangelical Christians that is throughout as sound theologically as the Baptist denomination.
There is not an evangelical denomination in America to-day that is as true to
the simple plain gospel of God, as it is recorded in the word, as the Baptist denomination.</q>
And the Presbyterian, Dr. W. G. T. Shedd, in a private letter dated Oct. 1, 1886,
writes as follows: <q>Among the denominations, we all look to the Baptists for steady
and firm adherence to sound doctrine. You have never had any internal doctrinal
conflicts, and from year to year you present an undivided front in defense of the Calvinistic
faith. Having no judicatures and regarding the local church as the unit, it is
remarkable that you maintain such a unity and solidarity of belief. If you could
impart your secret to our Congregational brethren, I think that some of them at least
would thank you.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. H. Strong, Sermon in London before the Baptist World Congress, July, 1905&mdash;<q>Coöperation
with Christ involves the spiritual unity not only of all Baptists with one
another, but of all Baptists with the whole company of true believers of every name.
We cannot, indeed, be true to our convictions without organizing into one body those
who agree with us in our interpretation of the Scriptures. Our denominational divisions
are at present necessities of nature. But we regret these divisions, and, as we grow in
grace and in the knowledge of the truth, we strive, at least in spirit, to rise above them.
In America our farms are separated from one another by fences, and in the springtime,
when the wheat and barley are just emerging from the earth, these fences are very
distinguishable and unpleasing features of the landscape. But later in the season, when
the corn has grown and the time of harvest is near, the grain is so tall that the fences
are entirely hidden, and for miles together you seem to see only a single field. It is
surely our duty to confess everywhere and always that we are first Christians and only
secondly Baptists. The tie which binds us to Christ is more important in our eyes than
that which binds us to those of the same faith and order. We live in hope that the
Spirit of Christ in us, and in all other Christian bodies, may induce such growth of mind
and heart that the sense of unity may not only overtop and hide the fences of division,
but may ultimately do away with these fences altogether.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Officers of the Church.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. The number of offices in the church is two:&mdash;first, the office of
bishop, presbyter, or pastor; and, secondly, the office of deacon.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That the appellations <q>bishop,</q> <q>presbyter,</q> and <q>pastor</q> designate
the same office and order of persons, may be shown from Acts 20:28&mdash;ἐπισκόπους ποιμαίνειν (cf. 17&mdash;πρεσβυτέρους); Phil. 1:1; 1 Tim. 3:1, 8; Titus
1:5, 7; 1 Pet. 5:1, 2&mdash;πρεσβυτέρους ... παρακαλῶ ὁ συμπρεσβύτερος ...
ποιμάνατε ποίμνιον ... ἐπισκοποῦντες. Conybeare and Howson: <q>The terms
<q>bishop</q> and <q>elder</q> are used in the New Testament as equivalent,&mdash;the
former denoting (as its meaning of overseer implies) the duties, the latter
the rank, of the office.</q> See passages quoted in Gieseler, Church History,
1:90, note 1&mdash;as, for example, Jerome: <q>Apud veteres iidem episcopi et
presbyteri, quia illud nomen dignitatis est, hoc ætatis. Idem est ergo
presbyter qui episcopus.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Take heed unto yourselves, and to all the flock, in which the Holy Spirit hath made you bishops</hi>
[marg. <q><hi rend='italic'>overseers</hi></q>], <hi rend='italic'>to feed</hi> [lit. <q><hi rend='italic'>to shepherd</hi>,</q> <q><hi rend='italic'>be pastors of</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>the church of the Lord which he purchased
with his own blood</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the elders of the church</hi></q> are those whom Paul addresses as
bishops or overseers, and whom he exhorts to be good pastors. <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>bishops and
deacons</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:1, 8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If a man seeketh the office of a bishop, he desireth a good work.... Deacons in like
manner must be grave</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Tit. 1:5, 7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>appoint elders in every city.... For the bishop must be blameless</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet.
5:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The elders therefore among you I exhort, who am a fellow-elder.... Tend</hi> [lit. <q><hi rend='italic'>shepherd</hi>,</q> <q><hi rend='italic'>be pastors
of</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>the flock of God which is among you, exercising the oversight</hi> [acting as bishops], <hi rend='italic'>not of constraint, but
<pb n='915'/><anchor id='Pg915'/>
willingly, according to the will of God.</hi></q> In this last passage, Westcott and Hort, with Tischendorf's
8th edition, follow א and B in omitting ἐπισκοποῦντες. Tregelles and our Revised
Version follow A and אc in retaining it. Rightly, we think; since it is easy to see how,
in a growing ecclesiasticism, it should have been omitted, from the feeling that too
much was here ascribed to a mere presbyter.
</p>

<p>
Lightfoot, Com. on Philippians, 95-99&mdash;<q>It is a fact now generally recognized by
theologians of all shades of opinion that in the language of the N. T. the same officer
in the church is called indifferently <q><hi rend='italic'>bishop</hi></q> (ἐπίσκοπος) and <q><hi rend='italic'>elder</hi></q> or <q><hi rend='italic'>presbyter</hi></q> (πρεσβύτερος)....
To these special officers the priestly functions and privileges of the Christian
people are never regarded as transferred or delegated. They are called stewards or
messengers of God, servants or ministers of the church, and the like, but the sacerdotal
is never once conferred upon them. The only priests under the gospel, designated as
such in the N. T., are the saints, the members of the Christian brotherhood.</q> On <hi rend='italic'>Titus
1:5, 7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>appoint elders.... For the bishop must be blameless</hi></q>&mdash;Gould, Bib. Theol. N. T., 150, remarks:
<q>Here the word <q><emph>for</emph></q> is quite out of place unless bishops and elders are identical. All
these officers, bishops as well as deacons, are confined to the local church in their jurisdiction.
The charge of a bishop is not a diocese, but a church. The functions are
mostly administrative, the teaching office being subordinate, and a distinction is made
between teaching elders and others, implying that the teaching function is not common
to them all.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dexter, Congregationalism, 114, shows that bishop, elder, pastor are names for the
same office: (1) from the significance of the words; (2) from the fact that the same
qualifications are demanded from all; (3) from the fact that the same duties are
assigned to all; (4) from the fact that the texts held to prove higher rank of the bishop
do not support that claim. Plumptre, in Pop. Com., Pauline Epistles, 555, 556&mdash;<q>There
cannot be a shadow of doubt that the two titles of Bishop and Presbyter were in the
Apostolic Age interchangeable.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The only plausible objection to the identity of the presbyter and the
bishop is that first suggested by Calvin, on the ground of 1 Tim. 5:17.
But this text only shows that the one office of presbyter or bishop involved
two kinds of labor, and that certain presbyters or bishops were more successful
in one kind than in the other. That gifts of teaching and ruling
belonged to the same individual, is clear from Acts 20:28-31; Eph. 4:11;
Heb. 13:7; 1 Tim. 3:2&mdash;ἐπίσκοπον διδακτικόν.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 5:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in the
word and in teaching</hi></q>; Wilson, Primitive Government of Christian Churches, concedes that
this last text <q>expresses a diversity in the exercise of the Presbyterial office, but not in
the office itself</q>; and although he was a Presbyterian, he very consistently refused to
have any ruling elders in his church.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:28, 31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>bishops, to feed the church of the Lord ... wherefore watch ye</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and some,
pastors and teachers</hi></q>&mdash;here Meyer remarks that the single article binds the two words
together, and prevents us from supposing that separate offices are intended. Jerome:
<q>Nemo ... pastoris sibi nomen assumere debet, nisi possit docere quos pascit.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Heb.
13:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Remember them that had the rule over you, men that spake unto you the word of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The
bishop must be ... apt to teach.</hi></q> The great temptation to ambition in the Christian ministry
is provided against by having no gradation of ranks. The pastor is a priest, only as
every Christian is. See Jacob, Eccl. Polity of N. T., 56; Olshausen, on 1 Tim. 5:17; Hackett
on <hi rend='italic'>Acts 14:23</hi>; Presb. Rev., 1886:89-126.
</p>

<p>
Dexter, Congregationalism, 52&mdash;<q>Calvin was a natural aristocrat, not a man of the
people like Luther. Taken out of his own family to be educated in a family of the
nobility, he received an early bent toward exclusiveness. He believed in authority
and loved to exercise it. He could easily have been a despot. He assumed all citizens
to be Christians until proof to the contrary. He resolved church discipline into police
control. He confessed that the eldership was an expedient to which he was driven by
circumstances, though after creating it he naturally enough endeavored to procure
Scriptural proof in its favor.</q> On the question, The Christian Ministry, is it a Priesthood?
see C. Anderson Scott, Evangelical Doctrine, 205-224.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) In certain of the N. T. churches there appears to have been a plurality
of elders (Acts 20:17; Phil. 1:1; Tit. 1:5). There is, however,
<pb n='916'/><anchor id='Pg916'/>
no evidence that the number of elders was uniform, or that the plurality
which frequently existed was due to any other cause than the size of the
churches for which these elders cared. The N. T. example, while it permits
the multiplication of assistant pastors according to need, does not
require a plural eldership in every case; nor does it render this eldership,
where it exists, of coördinate authority with the church. There are indications,
moreover, that, at least in certain churches, the pastor was one, while
the deacons were more than one, in number.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called to him the elders of the church</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Paul
and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus, to all the saints in Christ Jesus that are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Tit. 1:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that were wanting,
and appoint elders in every city, as I gave thee charge.</hi></q> See, however, <hi rend='italic'>Acts 12:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Tell these things unto
James, and to the brethren</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>15:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying, Brethren, hearken
unto me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>21:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the day following Paul went in with us unto James; and all the elders were present</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal.
1:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But other of the apostles saw I none, save James the Lord's brother</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>certain came from James.</hi></q>
These passages seem to indicate that James was the pastor or president of the church
at Jerusalem, an intimation which tradition corroborates.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The bishop therefore must be without reproach</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Tit. 1:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the bishop must be blameless, as
God's steward</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:8, 10, 12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Deacons in like manner must be grave.... And let these also first be
proved; then let them serve as deacons, if they be blameless.... Let deacons be husbands of one wife, ruling their
children and their own houses well</hi></q>&mdash;in all these passages the bishop is spoken of in the singular
number, the deacons in the plural. So, too, in <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 2:1, 8, 12, 18 and 3:1, 7, 14</hi>, <q><hi rend='italic'>the angel of the
church</hi></q> is best interpreted as meaning the pastor of the church; and, if this be correct,
it is clear that each church had, not many pastors, but one.
</p>

<p>
It would, moreover, seem antecedently improbable that every church of Christ, however
small, should be required to have a plural eldership, particularly since churches
exist that have only a single male member. A plural eldership is natural and advantageous,
only where the church is very numerous and the pastor needs assistants in his
work: and only in such cases can we say that New Testament example favors it. For
advocacy of the theory of plural eldership, see Fish, Ecclesiology, 229-249; Ladd, Principles
of Church Polity, 22-29. On the whole subject of offices in the church, see Dexter,
Congregationalism, 77-98; Dagg, Church Order, 241-266; Lightfoot on the Christian
Ministry, appended to his Commentary on Philippians, and published in his Dissertations
on the Apostolic Age.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. The duties belonging to these offices.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The pastor, bishop, or elder is:
</p>

<p>
First,&mdash;a spiritual teacher, in public and private;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:20, 21, 35</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>how I shrank not from declaring unto you anything that was profitable, and teaching
you publicly, and from house to house, testifying both to Jews and to Greeks repentance toward God, and faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ.... In all things I gave you an example, that so laboring ye ought to help the weak, and
to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, It is more blessed to give than to receive</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 5:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But
we beseech you, brethren, to know them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 13:7, 17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Remember them that had the rule over you, men that spake unto you the word of God; and
considering the issue of their life, imitate their faith.... Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit to them:
for they watch in behalf of your souls, as they that shall give account.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Here we should remember that the pastor's private work of religious conversation
and prayer is equally important with his public ministrations; in this respect he is to
be an example to his flock, and they are to learn from him the art of winning the
unconverted and of caring for those who are already saved. A Jewish Rabbi once
said: <q>God could not be every where,&mdash;therefore he made mothers.</q> We may substitute,
for the word 'mothers,' the word 'pastors.' Bishop Ken is said to have made a
vow every morning, as he rose, that he would not be married that day. His own lines
best express his mind: <q>A virgin priest the altar best attends; our Lord that state
commands not, but commends.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Secondly,&mdash;administrator of the ordinances;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19, 20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Go ye therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Spirit: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I commanded</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:16, 17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And
<pb n='917'/><anchor id='Pg917'/>
I baptized also the household of Stephanas: besides, I know not whether I baptized any other. For Christ sent me
not to baptize, but to preach the gospel.</hi></q> Here it is evident that, although the pastor administers
the ordinances, this is not his main work, nor is the church absolutely dependent upon
him in the matter. He is not set, like an O. T. priest, to minister at the altar, but to
preach the gospel. In an emergency any other member appointed by the church may
administer them with equal propriety, the church always determining who are fit subjects
of the ordinances, and constituting him their organ in administering them. Any
other view is based on sacramental notions, and on ideas of apostolic succession. All
Christians are <q><hi rend='italic'>priests unto ... God</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 1:6</hi>). <q>This universal priesthood is a priesthood,
not of expiation, but of worship, and is bound to no ritual, or order of times
and places</q> (P. S. Moxom).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thirdly,&mdash;superintendent of the discipline, as well as presiding officer at
the meetings, of the church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Superintendent of discipline: <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 5:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially those who labor in the word and in teaching</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if a man knoweth not how to rule his own
house, how shall he take care of the church of God?</hi></q> Presiding officer at meetings of the church: <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor.
12:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>governments</hi></q>&mdash;here κυβερνήσεις, or <q><hi rend='italic'>governments</hi>,</q> indicating the duties of the pastor,
are the counterpart of ἀντιλήψεις, or <q><hi rend='italic'>helps</hi>,</q> which designate the duties of the deacons;
<hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 5:2, 3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Tend the flock of God which is among you, exercising the oversight, not of constraint, but willingly,
according to the will of God; nor yet for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as lording it over the charge allotted
to you, but making yourselves ensamples to the flock.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
In the old Congregational churches of New England, an authority was accorded to
the pastor which exceeded the New Testament standard. <q>Dr. Bellamy could break in
upon a festival which he deemed improper, and order the members of his parish to their
homes.</q> The congregation rose as the minister entered the church, and stood uncovered
as he passed out of the porch. We must not hope or desire to restore the New
England <foreign rend='italic'>régime</foreign>. The pastor is to take responsibility, to put himself forward when
there is need, but he is to <emph>rule</emph> only by moral suasion, and that only by guiding, teaching,
and carrying into effect the rules imposed by Christ and the decisions of the church
in accordance with those rules.
</p>

<p>
Dexter, Congregationalism, 115, 155, 157&mdash;<q>The Governor of New York suggests to
the Legislature such and such enactments, and then executes such laws as they please
to pass. He is chief ruler of the State, while the Legislature adopts or rejects what he
proposes.</q> So the pastor's functions are not legislative, but executive. Christ is the
only lawgiver. In fulfilling this office, the manner and spirit of the pastor's work are
of as great importance as are correctness of judgment and faithfulness to Christ's law.
<q>The young man who cannot distinguish the wolves from the dogs should not think
of becoming a shepherd.</q> Gregory Nazianzen: <q>Either teach none, or let your life
teach too.</q> See Harvey, The Pastor; Wayland, Apostolic Ministry; Jacob, Eccl.
Polity of N. T., 99; Samson, in Madison Avenue Lectures, 261-288.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The deacon is helper to the pastor and the church, in both spiritual
and temporal things.
</p>

<p>
First,&mdash;relieving the pastor of external labors, informing him of the
condition and wants of the church, and forming a bond of union between
pastor and people.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 6:1-6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now in these days, when the number of the disciples was multiplying, there arose a murmuring of the
Grecian Jews against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration. And the twelve
called the multitude of the disciples unto them, and said, It is not fit that we should forsake the word of God, and serve
tables. Look ye out therefore, brethren, from among you seven men of good report, full of the Spirit and of wisdom,
whom we may appoint over this business. But we will continue stedfastly in prayer, and in the ministry of the word.
And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and
Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolaus a proselyte of Antioch; whom they set
before the apostles: and when they had prayed, they laid their hands upon them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>8-20</hi>&mdash;where Stephen
shows power in disputation; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 12:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>or ministry</hi> διακονίαν, <hi rend='italic'>let us give ourselves to our ministry</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>helps</hi></q>&mdash;here ἀντιλήψεις, <q><hi rend='italic'>helps</hi>,</q> indicating the duties of deacons, are
the counterpart of κυβερνήσεις, <q><hi rend='italic'>governments</hi>,</q> which designate the duties of the pastor;
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>bishops and deacons.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. E. G. Robinson did not regard the election of the seven, in <hi rend='italic'>Acts 6:1-4</hi>, as marking
the origin of the diaconate, though he thought the diaconate grew out of this election.
<pb n='918'/><anchor id='Pg918'/>
The Autobiography of C. H. Spurgeon, 3:22, gives an account of the election of
<q>elders</q> at the Metropolitan Tabernacle in London. These <q>elders</q> were to attend
to the spiritual affairs of the church, as the deacons were to attend to the temporal
affairs. These <q>elders</q> were chosen year by year, while the office of deacon was permanent.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Secondly,&mdash;helping the church, by relieving the poor and sick and
ministering in an informal way to the church's spiritual needs, and by
performing certain external duties connected with the service of the
sanctuary.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Since deacons are to be helpers, it is not necessary in all cases that they should be old
or rich; in fact, it is better that among the number of deacons the various differences
in station, age, wealth, and opinion in the church should be represented. The qualifications
for the diaconate mentioned in <hi rend='italic'>Acts 6:1-4</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:8-13</hi>, are, in substance: wisdom,
sympathy, and spirituality. There are advantages in electing deacons, not for
life, but for a term of years. While there is no New Testament prescription in this
matter, and each church may exercise its option, service for a term of years, with
re-election where the office has been well discharged, would at least seem favored by
<hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Let these also first be proved; then let them serve as deacons, if they be blameless</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For they
that have served well as deacons gain to themselves a good standing, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ
Jesus.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Expositor's Greek Testament, on <hi rend='italic'>Acts 5:6</hi>, remarks that those who carried out and
buried Ananias are called οἱ νεώτεροι&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the young men</hi></q>&mdash;and in the case of Sapphira they
were οἱ νεανίσκοι&mdash;meaning the same thing. <q>Upon the natural distinction between
πρεσβύτεροι and νεώτεροι&mdash;elders and young men&mdash;it may well have been that official
duties in the church were afterward based.</q> Dr. Leonard Bacon thought that the
apostles included the whole membership in the <q><hi rend='italic'>we</hi>,</q> when they said: <q><hi rend='italic'>It is not fit that we
should forsake the word of God, and serve tables</hi>.</q> The deacons, on this interpretation, were chosen
to help the whole church in temporal matters.
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 16:1, 2</hi>, we have apparent mention of a deaconess&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I commend unto you Phœbe our
sister, who is a servant</hi> [marg.: <q><hi rend='italic'>deaconess</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>of the church that is at Cenchreæ ... for she herself also hath been
a helper of many, and of mine own self</hi>.</q> See also <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Women in like manner must be grave, not
slanderers, temperate, faithful in all things</hi></q>&mdash;here Ellicott and Alford claim that the word <q><hi rend='italic'>women</hi></q>
refers, not to deacons' wives, as our Auth. Vers. had it, but to deaconesses. Dexter,
Congregationalism, 69, 132, maintains that the office of deaconess, though it once existed,
has passed away, as belonging to a time when men could not, without suspicion, minister
to women.
</p>

<p>
This view that there are temporary offices in the church does not, however, commend
itself to us. It is more correct to say that there is yet doubt whether there <emph>was</emph> such an
office as deaconess, even in the early church. Each church has a right in this matter
to interpret Scripture for itself, and to act accordingly. An article in the Bap. Quar.,
1869:40, denies the existence of any diaconal rank or office, for male or female. Fish,
in his Ecclesiology, holds that Stephen was a deacon, but an elder also, and preached as
elder, not as deacon,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Acts 6:1-4</hi> being called the institution, not of the diaconate, but of
the Christian ministry. The use of the phrase διακονεῖν τραπέζαις, and the distinction
between the diaconate and the pastorate subsequently made in the Epistles, seem to
refute this interpretation. On the fitness of women for the ministry of religion, see
F. P. Cobbe, Peak of Darien, 199-262; F. E. Willard, Women in the Pulpit; B. T. Roberts,
Ordaining Women. On the general subject, see Howell, The Deaconship; Williams,
The Deaconship; Robinson, N. T. Lexicon, ἀντιλήψις. On the Claims of the Christian
Ministry, and on Education for the Ministry, see A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion,
269-318, and Christ in Creation, 314-331.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>C. Ordination of officers.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(a) What is ordination?</head>

<p>
Ordination is the setting apart of a person divinely called to a work of
special ministration in the church. It does not involve the communication
of power,&mdash;it is simply a recognition of powers previously conferred by
God, and a consequent formal authorization, on the part of the church, to
exercise the gifts already bestowed. This recognition and authorization
<pb n='919'/><anchor id='Pg919'/>
should not only be expressed by the vote in which the candidate is
approved by the church or the council which represents it, but should also
be accompanied by a special service of admonition, prayer, and the laying-on
of hands (Acts 6:5, 6; 13:2, 3; 14:23; 1 Tim. 4:14; 5:22).
</p>

<p>
Licensure simply commends a man to the churches as fitted to preach.
Ordination recognizes him as set apart to the work of preaching and
administering ordinances, in some particular church or in some designated
field of labor, as representative of the church.
</p>

<p>
Of his call to the ministry, the candidate himself is to be first persuaded
(1 Cor. 9:16; 1 Tim. 1:12); but, secondly, the church must be persuaded
also, before he can have authority to minister among them (1 Tim.
3:2-7; 4:14; Titus 1:6-9).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The word <q>ordain</q> has come to have a technical signification not found in the New
Testament. There it means simply to choose, appoint, set apart. In <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 2:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whereunto
I was appointed</hi> [ἐτέθην] <hi rend='italic'>a preacher and an apostle ... a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth</hi></q>&mdash;it
apparently denotes ordination of God. In the following passages we read of an ordination
by the church: <hi rend='italic'>Acts 6:5, 6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen
... and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolaus ... whom they set before the
apostles: and when they had prayed, they laid their hands upon them</hi></q>&mdash;the ordination of deacons; <hi rend='italic'>13:2, 3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And
as they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them. Then, when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them, they sent them
away</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>14:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And when they had appointed for them elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they
commended them to the Lord, on whom they had believed</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 4:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which
was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Lay hands hastily on no
man, neither be partaker of other men's sins.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Cambridge Platform, 1648, chapter 9&mdash;<q>Ordination is nothing else but the solemn
putting of a man into his place and office in the church whereunto he had right before
by election, being like the installing of a Magistrate in the Commonwealth.</q> Ordination
confers no authority&mdash;it only recognizes authority already conferred by God.
Since it is only recognition, it can be repeated as often as a man changes his denominational
relations. Leonard Bacon: <q>The action of a Council has no more authority
than the reason on which it is based. The church calling the Council is a competent
court of appeal from any decision of the Council.</q>
</p>

<p>
Since ordination is simply choosing, appointing, setting apart, it seems plain that in
the case of deacons, who sustain official relations only to the church that constitutes
them, ordination requires no consultation with other churches. But in the ordination
of a pastor, there are three natural stages: (1) the call of the church; (2) the decision
of a council (the council being virtually only the church advised by its brethren); (3)
the publication of this decision by a public service of prayer and the laying-on of
hands. The prior call to be pastor may be said, in the case of a man yet unordained, to
be given by the church conditionally, and in anticipation of a ratification of its action
by the subsequent judgment of the council. In a well-instructed church, the calling
of a council is a regular method of appeal from the church unadvised to the church
advised by its brethren; and the vote of the council approving the candidate is only
the essential completing of an ordination, of which the vote of the church calling the
candidate to the pastorate was the preliminary stage.
</p>

<p>
This setting apart by the church, with the advice and assistance of the council, is all
that is necessarily implied in the New Testament words which are translated <q>ordain</q>;
and such ordination, by simple vote of church and council, could not be counted
invalid. But it would be irregular. New Testament precedent makes certain accompaniments
not only appropriate, but obligatory. A formal publication of the decree
of the council, by laying-on of hands, in connection with prayer, is the last of the
duties of this advisory body, which serves as the organ and assistant of the church.
The laying-on of hands is appointed to be the regular accompaniment of ordination, as
baptism is appointed to be the regular accompaniment of regeneration; while yet the
laying-on of hands is no more the substance of ordination, than baptism is the substance
of regeneration.
</p>

<p>
The imposition of hands is the natural symbol of the communication, not of grace,
but of authority. It does not make a man a minister of the gospel, any more than
<pb n='920'/><anchor id='Pg920'/>
coronation makes Victoria a queen. What it does signify and publish, is formal
recognition and authorization. Viewed in this light, there not only can be no objection
to the imposition of hands upon the ground that it favors sacramentalism, but
insistence upon it is the bounden duty of every council of ordination.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Spurgeon was never ordained. He began and ended his remarkable ministry as
a lay preacher. He revolted from the sacramentalism of the Church of England, which
seemed to hold that in the imposition of hands in ordination divine grace trickled down
through a bishop's finger ends, and he felt moved to protest against it. In our judgment
it would have been better to follow New Testament precedent, and at the same time to
instruct the churches as to the real meaning of the laying-on of hands. The Lord's
Supper had in a similar manner been interpreted as a physical communication of grace,
but Mr. Spurgeon still continued to observe the Lord's Supper. His gifts enabled him
to carry his people with him, when a man of smaller powers might by peculiar views
have ruined his ministry. He was thankful that he was pastor of a large church,
because he felt that he had not enough talent to be pastor of a small one. He said that
when he wished to make a peculiar impression on his people he put himself into his
cannon and fired himself at them. He refused the degree of Doctor of Divinity, and
said that <q>D. D.</q> often meant <q>Doubly Destitute.</q> Dr. P. S. Henson suggests that
the letters mean only <q>Fiddle Dee Dee.</q> For Spurgeon's views on ordination, see his
Autobiography, 1:355 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
</p>

<p>
John Wesley's three tests of a call to preach: <q>Inquire of applicants,</q> he says, <q>1. Do
they know God as a pardoning God? Have they the love of God abiding in them? Do
they desire and see nothing but God? And are they holy, in all manner of conversation?
2. Have they gifts, as well as grace, for the work? Have they a clear sound
understanding? Have they a right judgment in the things of God? Have they a just
conception of salvation by faith? And has God given them any degree of utterance?
Do they speak justly, readily, clearly? 3. Have they fruit? Are any truly convinced
of sin, and converted to God, by their preaching?</q> The second of these qualifications
seems to have been in the mind of the little girl who said that the bishop, in laying
hands on the candidate, was feeling of his head to see whether he had brains enough to
preach. There is some need of the preaching of a <q>trial sermon</q> by the candidate, as
proof to the Council that he has the gifts requisite for a successful ministry. In this
respect the Presbyteries of Scotland are in advance of us.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(b) Who are to ordain?</head>

<p>
Ordination is the act of the church, not the act of a privileged class in
the church, as the eldership has sometimes wrongly been regarded, nor yet
the act of other churches, assembled by their representatives in council.
No ecclesiastical authority higher than that of the local church is recognized
in the New Testament. This authority, however, has its limits; and since
the church has no authority outside of its own body, the candidate for
ordination should be a member of the ordaining church.
</p>

<p>
Since each church is bound to recognize the presence of the Spirit in
other rightly constituted churches, and its own decisions, in like manner,
are to be recognized by others, it is desirable in ordination, as in all
important steps affecting other churches, that advice be taken before the
candidate is inducted into office, and that other churches be called to sit
with it in council, and if thought best, assist in setting the candidate apart
for the ministry.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Hands were laid on Paul and Barnabas at Antioch, not by their ecclesiastical superiors,
as High Church doctrine would require, but by their equals or inferiors, as simple
representatives of the church. Ordination was nothing more than the recognition of
a divine appointment and the commending to God's care and blessing of those so
appointed. The council of ordination is only the church advised by its brethren, or
a committee with power, to act for the church after deliberation.
</p>

<p>
The council of ordination is not to be composed simply of ministers who have been
themselves ordained. As the whole church is to preserve the ordinances and to maintain
sound doctrine, and as the unordained church member is often a more sagacious
<pb n='921'/><anchor id='Pg921'/>
judge of a candidate's Christian experience than his own pastor would be, there seems
no warrant, either in Scripture or in reason, for the exclusion of lay delegates from
ordaining councils. It was not merely the apostles and elders, but the whole church at
Jerusalem, that passed upon the matters submitted to them at the council, and others
than ministers appear to have been delegates. The theory that only ministers can
ordain has in it the beginnings of a hierarchy. To make the ministry a close corporation
is to recognize the principle of apostolic succession, to deny the validity of all our
past ordinations, and to sell to an ecclesiastical caste the liberties of the church of God.
Very great importance attaches to decorum and settled usage in matters of ordination.
To secure these, the following suggestions are made with regard to
</p>

<p>
I. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Preliminary Arrangements</hi> to be attended to by the candidate: 1. His letter of
dismission should be received and acted upon by the church before the Council convenes.
Since the church has no jurisdiction outside of its own membership, the candidate
should be a member of the church which proposes to ordain him. 2. The church
should vote to call the Council. 3. It should invite all the churches of its Association.
4. It should send printed invitations, asking written responses. 5. Should have printed
copies of an Order of Procedure, subject to adoption by the Council. 6. The candidate
may select one or two persons to officiate at the public service, subject to approval of
the Council. 7. The clerk of the church should be instructed to be present with the
records of the church and the minutes of the Association, so that he may call to order
and ask responses from delegates. 8. Ushers should be appointed to ensure reserved
seats for the Council. 9. Another room should be provided for the private session of
the Council. 10. The choir should be instructed that one anthem, one hymn, and one
doxology will suffice for the public service. 11. Entertainment of the delegates should
be provided for. 12. A member of the church should be chosen to present the candidate
to the Council. 13. The church should be urged on the previous Sunday to attend
the examination of the candidate as well as the public service.
</p>

<p>
II. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Candidate at the Council</hi>: 1. His demeanor should be that of an applicant.
Since he asks the favorable judgment of his brethren, a modest bearing and great
patience in answering their questions, are becoming to his position. 2. Let him stand
during his narration, and during questions, unless for reasons of ill health or fatigue he is
specially excused. 3. It will be well to divide his narration into 15 minutes for his Christian
experience, 10 minutes for his call to the ministry, and 35 minutes for his views of
doctrine. 4. A <hi rend='italic'>viva voce</hi> statement of all these three is greatly preferable to an elaborate
written account. 5. In the relation of his views of doctrine: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the more fully he
states them, the less need there will be for questioning; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) his statement should be
positive, not negative&mdash;not what he does not believe, but what he <emph>does</emph> believe; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) he
is not required to tell the <emph>reasons</emph> for his belief, unless he is specially questioned with
regard to these; (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) he should elaborate the later and practical, not the earlier and
theoretical, portions of his theological system; (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) he may well conclude each point
of his statement with a single text of Scripture proof.
</p>

<p>
III. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Duty of the Council</hi>: 1. It should not proceed to examine the candidate
until proper credentials have been presented. 2. It should in every case give to the
candidate a searching examination, in order that this may not seem invidious in other
cases. 3. Its vote of approval should read: <q>We do now set apart,</q> and <q>We will hold
a public service expressive of this fact.</q> 4. Strict decorum should be observed in
every stage of the proceedings, remembering that the Council is acting for Christ the
great head of the church and is transacting business for eternity. 5. The Council
should do no other business than that for which the church has summoned it, and
when that business is done, the Council should adjourn <hi rend='italic'>sine die</hi>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is always to be remembered, however, that the power to ordain rests
with the church, and that the church may proceed without a Council, or
even against the decision of the Council. Such ordination, of course, would
give authority only within the bounds of the individual church. Where no
immediate exception is taken to the decision of the Council, that decision is
to be regarded as virtually the decision of the church by which it was
called. The same rule applies to a Council's decision to depose from the
ministry. In the absence of immediate protest from the church, the decision
of the Council is rightly taken as virtually the decision of the church.
</p>

<pb n='922'/><anchor id='Pg922'/>

<p>
In so far as ordination is an act performed by the local church with the
advice and assistance of other rightly constituted churches, it is justly
regarded as giving formal permission to exercise gifts and administer ordinances
within the bounds of such churches. Ordination is not, therefore,
to be repeated upon the transfer of the minister's pastoral relation from
one church to another. In every case, however, where a minister from a
body of Christians not Scripturally constituted assumes the pastoral relation
in a rightly organized church, there is peculiar propriety, not only in
the examination, by a Council, of his Christian experience, call to the
ministry, and views of doctrine, but also in that act of formal recognition
and authorization which is called ordination.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Council should be numerous and impartially constituted. The church calling the
Council should be represented in it by a fair number of delegates. Neither the church,
nor the Council, should permit a prejudgment of the case by the previous announcement
of an ordination service. While the examination of the candidate should be
public, all danger that the Council be unduly influenced by pressure from without
should be obviated by its conducting its deliberations, and arriving at its decision, in
private session. We subjoin the form of a letter missive, calling a Council of ordination;
an order of procedure after the Council has assembled; and a programme of
exercises for the public service.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Letter Missive.</hi>&mdash;The &mdash;&mdash; church of &mdash;&mdash; to the &mdash;&mdash; church of &mdash;&mdash;: <hi rend='italic'>Dear Brethren</hi>:
By vote of this church, you are requested to send your pastor and two delegates to
meet with us in accordance with the following resolutions, passed by us on the &mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash;,
19&mdash;: <hi rend='italic'>Whereas</hi>, brother &mdash;&mdash;, a member of this church, has offered himself to the work
of the gospel ministry, and has been chosen by us as our pastor, therefore, <hi rend='italic'>Resolved</hi>, 1.
That such neighboring churches, in fellowship with us, as shall be herein designated,
be requested to send their pastor and two delegates each, to meet and counsel with this
church, at &mdash; o'clock &mdash;. M., on &mdash;&mdash;, 19&mdash;&mdash;, and if, after examination, he be approved,
that brother &mdash;&mdash; be set apart, by vote of the Council, to the gospel ministry, and that
a public service be held, expressive of this fact. <hi rend='italic'>Resolved</hi>, 2. That the Council, if it
do so ordain, be requested to appoint two of its number to act with the candidate, in
arranging the public services. <hi rend='italic'>Resolved</hi>, 3. That printed letters of invitation, embodying
these resolutions, and signed by the clerk of this church, be sent to the following
churches, &mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash;, and that these churches be requested to furnish to
their delegates an officially signed certificate of their appointment, to be presented at
the organization of the Council. <hi rend='italic'>Resolved</hi>, 4. That Rev. &mdash;&mdash;, and brethren &mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash;, be
also invited by the clerk of the church to be present as members of the Council.
<hi rend='italic'>Resolved</hi>, 5. That brethren &mdash;&mdash;, &mdash;&mdash;, and &mdash;&mdash;, be appointed as our delegates, to represent
this church in the deliberations of the Council; and that brother &mdash;&mdash; be requested
to present the candidate to the Council, with an expression of the high respect and
warm attachment with which we have welcomed him and his labors among us. In
behalf of the church, &mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash;, Clerk. &mdash;&mdash;, 19&mdash;.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Order of Procedure.</hi>&mdash;1. Reading, by the clerk of the church, of the letter-missive,
followed by a call, in their order, upon all churches and individuals invited, to present
responses and names in writing; each delegate, as he presents his credentials, taking
his seat in a portion of the house reserved for the Council. 2. Announcement, by the
clerk of the church, that a Council has convened, and call for the nomination of a
moderator,&mdash;the motion to be put by the clerk,&mdash;after which the moderator takes
the chair. 3. Organization completed by election of a clerk of the Council, the offering
of prayer, and an invitation to visiting brethren to sit with the Council, but not to vote.
4. Reading, on behalf of the church, by its clerk, of the records of the church concerning
the call extended to the candidate, and his acceptance, together with documentary
evidence of his licensure, of his present church membership, and of his standing in
other respects, if coming from another denomination. 5. Vote, by the Council, that
the proceedings of the church, and the standing of the candidate, warrant an examination
of his claim to ordination. 6. Introduction of the candidate to the Council, by
some representative of the church, with an expression of the church's feeling respecting
him and his labors. 7. Vote to hear his Christian experience. Narration on the
part of the candidate, followed by questions as to any features of it still needing elucidation.
8. Vote to hear the candidate's reasons for believing himself called to the
<pb n='923'/><anchor id='Pg923'/>
ministry. Narration and questions. 9. Vote to hear the candidate's views of Christian
doctrine. Narration and questions. 10. Vote to conclude the public examination,
and to withdraw for private session. 11. In private session, after prayer, the Council
determines, by three separate votes, in order to secure separate consideration of each
question, whether it is satisfied with the candidate's Christian experience, call to the
ministry, and views of Christian doctrine. 12. Vote that the candidate be hereby set
apart to the gospel ministry, and that a public service be held, expressive of this fact;
that for this purpose, a committee of two be appointed, to act with the candidate, in
arranging such service of ordination, and to report before adjournment. 13. Reading
of minutes, by clerk of Council, and correction of them, to prepare for presentation at
the ordination service, and for preservation in the archives of the church. 14. Vote to
give the candidate a certificate of ordination, signed by the moderator and clerk of the
Council, and to publish an account of the proceedings in the journals of the denomination.
15. Adjourn to meet at the service of ordination.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Programme Of Public Service</hi> (two hours in length).&mdash;1. Voluntary&mdash;five minutes.
2. Anthem&mdash;five. 3. Reading minutes of the Council, by the clerk of the
Council&mdash;ten. 4. Prayer of invocation&mdash;five. 5. Reading of Scripture&mdash;five. 6. Sermon&mdash;twenty-five.
7. Prayer of ordination, with laying-on of hands&mdash;fifteen. 8.
Hymn&mdash;ten. 9. Right hand of fellowship&mdash;five. 10. Charge to the candidate&mdash;fifteen.
11. Charge to the church&mdash;fifteen. 12. Doxology&mdash;five. 13. Benediction by the newly
ordained pastor.
</p>

<p>
The tenor of the N. T. would seem to indicate that deacons should be ordained with
prayer and the laying-on of hands, though not by council or public service. Evangelists,
missionaries, ministers serving as secretaries of benevolent societies, should also
be ordained, since they are organs of the church, set apart for special religious work on
behalf of the churches. The same rule applies to those who are set to be teachers of
the teachers, the professors of theological seminaries. Philip, baptizing the eunuch, is
to be regarded as an organ of the church at Jerusalem. Both home missionaries and
foreign missionaries are evangelists; and both, as organs of the home churches to
which they belong, are not under obligation to take letters of dismission to the churches
they gather. George Adam Smith, in his Life of Henry Drummond, 265, says that
Drummond was ordained to his professorship by the laying-on of the hands of the Presbytery:
<q>The rite is the same in the case whether of a minister or of a professor, for
the church of Scotland recognizes no difference between her teachers and her pastors,
but lays them under the same vows, and ordains them all as ministers of Christ's gospel
and of his sacraments.</q>
</p>

<p>
Rome teaches that ordination is a sacrament, and <q>once a priest, always a priest,</q>
but only when Rome confers the ordination. It is going a great deal further than
Rome to maintain the indelibility of <emph>all</emph> orders&mdash;at least, of all orders conferred by an
evangelical church. At Dover in England, a medical gentleman declined to pay his
doctor's bill upon the ground that it was not the custom of his calling to pay one
another for their services. It appeared however that he was a retired practitioner, and
upon that ground he lost his case. Ordination, like vaccination, may run out. Retirement
from the office of public teacher should work a forfeiture of the official character.
The authorization granted by the Council was based upon a previous recognition of a
divine call. When by reason of permanent withdrawal from the ministry, and devotion
to wholly secular pursuits, there remains no longer any divine call to be recognized,
all authority and standing as a Christian minister should cease also. We therefore
repudiate the doctrine of the <q>indelibility of sacred orders,</q> and the corresponding
maxim: <q>Once ordained, always ordained</q>; although we do not, with the Cambridge
Platform, confine the ministerial function to the pastoral relation. That Platform
held that <q>the pastoral relation ceasing, the ministerial function ceases, and the pastor
becomes a layman again, to be restored to the ministry only by a second ordination,
called installation. This theory of the ministry proved so inadequate, that it was held
scarcely more than a single generation. It was rejected by the Congregational
churches of England ten years after it was formulated in New England.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The National Council of Congregational Churches, in 1880, resolved that any man
serving a church as minister can be dealt with and disciplined by any church, no matter
what his relations may be in church membership, or ecclesiastical affiliations. If the
church choosing him will not call a council, then any church can call one for that purpose</q>;
see New Englander, July, 1883:461-491. This latter course, however, presupposes
that the steps of fraternal labor and admonition, provided for in our next
section on the Relation of Local Churches to one another, have been taken, and have
<pb n='924'/><anchor id='Pg924'/>
been insufficient to induce proper action on the part of the church to which such
minister belongs.
</p>

<p>
The authority of a Presbyterian church is limited to the bounds of its own
denomination. It cannot ordain ministers for Baptist churches, any more than
it can ordain them for Methodist churches or for Episcopal churches. When a
Presbyterian minister becomes a Baptist, his motives for making the change and the
conformity of his views to the New Testament standard need to be scrutinized by
Baptists, before they can admit him to their Christian and church fellowship; in other
words, he needs to be ordained by a Baptist church. Ordination is no more a discourtesy
to the other denomination than Baptism is. Those who oppose reördination in
such cases virtually hold to the Romish view of the sacredness of orders.
</p>

<p>
The Watchman, April 17, 1902&mdash;<q>The Christian ministry is not a priestly class which
the laity is bound to support. If the minister cannot find a church ready to support
him, there is nothing to prevent his entering another calling. Only ten per cent. of the
men who start in independent business avoid failure, and a much smaller proportion
achieve substantial success. They are not failures, for they do useful and valuable
work. But they do not secure the prizes. It is not wonderful that the proportion of
ministers securing prominent pulpits is small. Many men fail in the ministry. There
is no sacred character imparted by ordination. They should go into some other avocation.
<q>Once a minister, always a minister</q> is a piece of Popery that Protestant churches
should get rid of.</q> See essay on Councils of Ordination, their Powers and Duties, by
A. H. Strong, in Philosophy and Religion, 259-268; Wayland, Principles and Practices
of Baptists, 114; Dexter, Congregationalism, 136, 145, 146, 150, 151. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Fish,
Ecclesiology, 365-399; Presb. Rev., 1886:89-126.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Discipline of the Church.</head>

<p>
A. Kinds of discipline.&mdash;Discipline is of two sorts, according as offences
are private or public. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Private offences are to be dealt with according
to the rule in Mat. 5:23, 24; 18:15-17.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 5:23, 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If therefore thou art offering thy gift at the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath
aught against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift</hi></q>&mdash;here is provision for self-discipline on the part of each offender;
<hi rend='italic'>18:15-17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And if thy brother sin against thee, go, show him his fault between thee and him alone: if he hear thee,
thou hast gained thy brother. But if he hear thee not, take with thee one or two more, that at the mouth of two
witnesses or three every word may be established. And if he refuse to hear them, tell it unto the church: and if he
refuse to hear the church also, let him be unto thee as the Gentile and the publican</hi></q>&mdash;here is, first, private
discipline, one of another; and then, only as a last resort, discipline by the church.
Westcott and Hort, however omit the εἰς σέ&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>against thee</hi></q>&mdash;in <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:15</hi>, and so make each
Christian responsible for bringing to repentance every brother whose sin he becomes
cognizant of. This would abolish the distinction between private and public offences.
</p>

<p>
When a brother wrongs me, I am not to speak of the offence to others, nor to write
to him a letter, but to go to him. If the brother is already penitent, he will start from
his house to see me at the same time that I start from my house to see him, and we
will meet just half way between the two. There would be little appeal to the church,
and little cherishing of ancient grudges, if Christ's disciples would observe his simple
rules. These rules impose a duty upon both the offending and the offended party.
When a brother brings a personal matter before the church, he should always be asked
whether he has obeyed Christ's command to labor privately with the offender. If he
has not, he should be bidden to keep silence.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Public offences are to be dealt with according to the rule in 1 Cor.
5:3-5, 13, and 2 Thess. 3:6.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 5:3-5, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For I verily, being absent in body but present in spirit, have already as though I were present
judged him that hath so wrought this thing, in the name of the Lord Jesus, ye being gathered together, and my spirit,
with the power of our Lord Jesus, to deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.... Put away the wicked man from among yourselves.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Notice here that Paul gave the incestuous person no opportunity to repent, confess,
or avert sentence. The church can have no valid evidence of repentance immediately
upon discovery and arraignment. At such a time the natural conscience always reacts
in remorse and self-accusation, but whether the sin is hated because of its inherent
wickedness, or only because of its unfortunate consequences, cannot be known at once.
Only fruits meet for repentance can prove repentance real. But such fruits take time,
<pb n='925'/><anchor id='Pg925'/>
And the church has no time to wait. Its good repute in the community, and its influence
over its own members, are at stake. These therefore demand the instant exclusion of
the wrong-doer, as evidence that the church clears its skirts from all complicity with
the wrong. In the case of gross public offences, labor with the offender is to come, not
before, but after, his excommunication; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 2:6-8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Sufficient to such a one is this punishment
which was inflicted by the many;... forgive him and comfort him;... confirm your love toward him.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
The church is not a Mutual Insurance Company, whose object is to protect and shield
its individual members. It is a society whose end is to represent Christ in the world,
and to establish his truth and righteousness. Christ commits his honor to its keeping.
The offender who is only anxious to escape judgment, and who pleads to be forgiven
without delay, often shows that he cares nothing for the cause of Christ which he has
injured, but that he has at heart only his own selfish comfort and reputation. The
truly penitent man will rather beg the church to exclude him, in order that it may free
itself from the charge of harboring iniquity. He will accept exclusion with humility,
will love the church that excludes him, will continue to attend its worship, will in due
time seek and receive restoration. There is always a way back into the church for
those who repent. But the Scriptural method of ensuring repentance is the method of
immediate exclusion.
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 2:6-8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>inflicted by the many</hi></q> might at first sight seem to imply that, although the
offender was excommunicated, it was only by a majority vote, some members of the
church dissenting. Some interpreters think he had not been excommunicated at all,
but that only ordinary association with him had ceased. But, if Paul's command in the
first epistle to <q><hi rend='italic'>put away the wicked man from among yourselves</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 5:13</hi>) had been thus disobeyed,
the apostle would certainly have mentioned and rebuked the disobedience. On
the contrary he praises them that they had done as he had advised. The action of the
church at Corinth was blessed by God to the quickening of conscience and the purification
of life. In many a modern church the exclusion of unworthy members has in
like manner given to Christians a new sense of their responsibility, while at the same
time it has convinced worldly people that the church was in thorough earnest. The
decisions of the church, indeed, when guided by the Holy Spirit, are nothing less than
an anticipation of the judgments of the last day; see <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>What things soever ye shall
bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and what things soever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.</hi></q> In
<hi rend='italic'>John 8:7</hi>, Jesus recognizes the sin and urges repentance, while he challenges the right of
the mob to execute judgment, and does away with the traditional stoning. His gracious
treatment of the sinning woman gave no hint as to the proper treatment of her case
by the regular synagogue authorities.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 3:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from
every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition which they received of us.</hi></q> The mere <q>dropping</q>
of names from the list of members seems altogether contrary to the spirit of the
N. T. polity. That recognizes only three methods of exit from the local church: (1)
exclusion; (2) dismission; (3) death. To provide for the case of members whose
residence has long been unknown, it is well for the church to have a standing rule that
all members residing at a distance shall report each year by letter or by contribution,
and, in case of failure to report for two successive years, shall be subject to discipline.
The action of the church, in such cases, should take the form of an adoption of preamble
and resolution: <q><hi rend='italic'>Whereas</hi> A. B. has been absent from the church for more than two
years, and has failed to comply with the standing rule requiring a yearly report or
contribution, therefore, <hi rend='italic'>Resolved</hi>, that the church withdraw from A. B. the hand of
fellowship.</q>
</p>

<p>
In <emph>all</emph> cases of exclusion, the resolution may uniformly read as above; the preamble
may indefinitely vary, and should always cite the exact nature of the offence. In this
way, neglect of the church or breach of covenant obligations may be distinguished from
offences against common morality, so that exclusion upon the former ground shall not
be mistaken for exclusion upon the latter. As the persons excluded are not commonly
present at the meeting of the church when they are excluded, a written copy of the
preamble and resolution, signed by the Clerk of the Church, should always be immediately
sent to them.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Relation of the pastor to discipline.&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) He has no original authority;
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) but is the organ of the church, and (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) superintendent of its
labors for its own purification and for the reclamation of offenders; and
<pb n='926'/><anchor id='Pg926'/>
therefore (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) may best do the work of discipline, not directly, by constituting
himself a special policeman or detective, but indirectly, by securing
proper labor on the part of the deacons or brethren of the church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The pastor should regard himself as a judge, rather than as a prosecuting attorney.
He should press upon the officers of his church their duty to investigate cases of immorality
and to deal with them. But if he himself makes charges, he loses dignity, and
puts it out of his power to help the offender. It is not well for him to be, or to have
the reputation of being, a ferreter-out of misdemeanors among his church members.
It is best for him in general to serve only as presiding officer in cases of discipline,
instead of being a partisan or a counsel for the prosecution. For this reason it is well
for him to secure the appointment by his church of a Prudential Committee, or Committee
on Discipline, whose duty it shall be at a fixed time each year to look over the list
of members, initiate labor in the case of delinquents, and, after the proper steps have
been taken, present proper preambles and resolutions in cases where the church needs to
take action. This regular yearly process renders discipline easy; whereas the neglect of
it for several successive years results in an accumulation of cases, in each of which the
person exposed to discipline has friends, and these are tempted to obstruct the church's
dealing with others from fear that the taking up of any other case may lead to the
taking up of that one in which they are most nearly interested. The church which
pays no regular attention to its discipline is like the farmer who milked his cow only
once a year, in order to avoid too great a drain; or like the small boy who did not see
how any one could bear to comb his hair every day,&mdash;he combed his own only once in
six weeks, and then it nearly killed him.
</p>

<p>
As the Prudential Committee, or Committee on Discipline, is simply the church itself
preparing its own business, the church may well require all complaints to be made to
it through the committee. In this way it may be made certain that the preliminary
steps of labor have been taken, and the disquieting of the church by premature charges
may be avoided. Where the committee, after proper representations made to it, fails
to do its duty, the individual member may appeal directly to the assembled church;
and the difference between the New Testament order and that of a hierarchy is this,
that according to the former all final action and responsibility is taken by the church
itself in its collective capacity, whereas on the latter the minister, the session, or the
bishop, so far as the individual church is concerned, determines the result. See Savage,
Church Discipline, Formative and Corrective; Dagg, Church Order, 268-274. On church
discipline in cases of remarriage after divorce, see A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion,
431-442.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Relation of Local Churches to one another.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. The general nature of this relation is that of fellowship between
equals.</head>

<p>
Notice here:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The absolute equality of the churches.&mdash;No church or council of
churches, no association or convention or society, can relieve any single
church of its direct responsibility to Christ, or assume control of its action.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The fraternal fellowship and coöperation of the churches.&mdash;No
church can properly ignore, or disregard, the existence or work of other
churches around it. Every other church is presumptively possessed of the
Spirit, in equal measure with itself. There must therefore be sympathy
and mutual furtherance of each other's welfare among churches, as among
individual Christians. Upon this principle are based letters of dismission,
recognition of the pastors of other churches, and all associational unions,
or unions for common Christian work.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
H. O. Rowlands, in Bap. Quar. Rev., Oct. 1891:669-677, urges the giving up of special
Councils, and the turning of the Association into a Permanent Council, not to take
original cognizance of what cases it pleases, but to consider and judge such questions
as may be referred to it by the individual churches. It could then revise and rescind
its action, whereas the present Council when once adjourned can never be called
<pb n='927'/><anchor id='Pg927'/>
together again. This method would prevent the packing of a Council, and the Council
when once constituted would have greater influence. We feel slow to sanction such a
plan, not only for the reason that it seems destitute of New Testament authority and
example, but because it tends toward a Presbyterian form of church government. All
permanent bodies of this sort gradually arrogate to themselves power; indirectly if not
directly they can assume original jurisdiction; their decisions have altogether too
great influence, if they go further than personal persuasion. The independence of the
individual church is a primary element of polity which must not be sacrificed or endangered
for the mere sake of inter-ecclesiastical harmony. Permanent Councils of any
sort are of doubtful validity. They need to be kept under constant watch and criticism,
lest they undermine our Baptist church government, a fundamental principle of which
is that there is no authority on earth above that of the local church.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. This fellowship involves the duty of special consultation with
regard to matters affecting the common interest.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The duty of seeking advice.&mdash;Since the order and good repute of
each is valuable to all the others, cases of grave importance and difficulty in
internal discipline, as well as the question of ordaining members to the ministry,
should be submitted to a council of churches called for the purpose.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The duty of taking advice.&mdash;For the same reason, each church
should show readiness to receive admonition from others. So long as this
is in the nature of friendly reminder that the church is guilty of defects
from the doctrine or practice enjoined by Christ, the mutual acceptance of
whose commands is the basis of all church fellowship, no church can justly
refuse to have such defects pointed out, or to consider the Scripturalness of
its own proceeding. Such admonition or advice, however, whether coming
from a single church or from a council of churches, is not itself of binding
authority. It is simply in the nature of moral suasion. The church
receiving it has still to compare it with Christ's laws. The ultimate decision
rests entirely with the church so advised or asking advice.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Churches should observe comity, and should not draw away one another's members.
Ministers should bring churches together, and should teach their members the larger
unity of the whole church of God. The pastor should not confine his interest to his
own church or even to his own Association. The State Convention, the Education
Society, the National Anniversaries, should all claim his attention and that of his people.
He should welcome new laborers and helpers, instead of regarding the ministry as a
close corporation whose numbers are to be kept forever small. E. G. Robinson: <q>The
spirit of sectarianism is devilish. It raises the church above Christ. Christ did not
say: <q>Blessed is the man who accepts the Westminster Confession or the Thirty-Nine
Articles.</q> There is not the least shadow of churchism in Christ. Churchism is a
revamped and whitewashed Judaism. It keeps up the middle wall of partition which
Christ has broken down.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. P. H. Mell, in his Manual of Parliamentary Practice, calls Church Councils <q>Committees
of Help.</q> President James C. Welling held that <q>We Baptists are not true to
our democratic polity in the conduct of our collective evangelical operations. In these
matters we are simply a bureaucracy, tempered by individual munificence.</q> A. J. Gordon,
Ministry of the Spirit, 149, 150, remarks on <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If two of you shall agree</hi></q>&mdash;συμφωνήσωσιν,
from which our word <q>symphony</q> comes: <q>If two shall <q>accord,</q> or
<q>symphonize</q> in what they ask, they have the promise of being heard. But, as in tuning
an organ, all the notes must be keyed to the standard pitch, else harmony were impossible,
so in prayer. It is not enough that two disciples agree with each other,&mdash;they
must agree with a Third&mdash;the righteous and holy Lord, before they can agree in intercession.
There may be agreement which is in most sinful conflict with the divine will:
<q><hi rend='italic'>How is it that ye have agreed together</hi></q>&mdash;συνεφωνήθη&mdash;the same word&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to try the Spirit of the Lord?</hi></q>
says Peter (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 5:9</hi>). Here is mutual accord, but guilty discord with the Holy Spirit.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='928'/><anchor id='Pg928'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. This fellowship may be broken by manifest departures from the
faith or practice of the Scriptures, on the part of any church.</head>

<p>
In such case, duty to Christ requires the churches, whose labors to reclaim
a sister church from error have proved unavailing, to withdraw their fellowship
from it, until such time as the erring church shall return to the path
of duty. In this regard, the law which applies to individuals applies to
churches, and the polity of the New Testament is congregational rather
than independent.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Independence is qualified by interdependence. While each church is, in the last resort
thrown upon its own responsibility in ascertaining doctrine and duty, it is to acknowledge
the indwelling of the Holy Spirit in other churches as well as in itself, and the
value of the public opinion of the churches as an indication of the mind of the Spirit.
The church in Antioch asked advice of the church in Jerusalem, although Paul himself
was at Antioch. Although no church or union of churches has rightful jurisdiction
over the single local body, yet the Council, when rightly called and constituted, has
the power of moral influence. Its decision is an index to truth, which only the gravest
reasons will justify the church in ignoring or refusing to follow.
</p>

<p>
Dexter, Congregationalism, 695&mdash;<q>Barrowism gave all power into the hands of the
elders, and it would have no Councils. Congregationalism is Brownism. It has two
foci: Independence and Interdependence.</q> Charles S. Scott, on Baptist Polity and the
Pastorate, in Bap. Quar. Rev., July, 1890:291-297&mdash;<q>The difference between the polity of
Baptist and of Congregational churches is in the relative authority of the Ecclesiastical
Council. Congregationalism is Councilism. Not only the ordination and first settlement
of the minister must be with the advice and consent of a Council, but every
subsequent unsettlement and settlement.</q> Baptist churches have regarded this dependence
upon Councils after the minister's ordination as extreme and unwarranted.
</p>

<p>
The fact that the church has always the right, for just cause, of going behind the
decision of the Council, and of determining for itself whether it will ratify or reject that
decision, shows conclusively that the church has parted with no particle of its original
independence or authority. Yet, though the Council is simply a counsellor&mdash;an organ
and helper of the church,&mdash;the neglect of its advice may involve such ecclesiastical or
moral wrong as to justify the churches represented in it, as well as other churches, in
withdrawing, from the church that called it, their denominational fellowship. The
relation of churches to one another is analogous to the relation of private Christians to
one another. No meddlesome spirit is to be allowed; but in matters of grave moment,
a church, as well as an individual, may be justified in giving advice unasked.
</p>

<p>
Lightfoot, in his new edition of Clemens Romanus, shows that the Epistle, instead of
emanating from Clement as Bishop of Rome, is a letter of the church at Rome to the
Corinthians, urging them to peace. No pope and no bishop existed, but the whole
church congregationally addressed its counsels to its sister body of believers at Corinth.
Congregationalism, in A. D. 95, considered it a duty to labor with a sister church that
had in its judgment gone astray, or that was in danger of going astray. The only primacy
was the primacy of the church, not of the bishop; and this primacy was a primacy
of goodness, backed up by metropolitan advantages. All this fraternal fellowship follows
from the fundamental conception of the local church as the concrete embodiment
of the universal church. Park: <q>Congregationalism recognizes a voluntary coöperation
and communion of the churches, which Independency does not do. Independent
churches ordain and depose pastors without asking advice from other churches.</q>
</p>

<p>
In accordance with this general principle, in a case of serious disagreement between
different portions of the same church, the council called to advise should be, if possible,
a mutual, not an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex parte</foreign>, council; see Dexter, Congregationalism, 2, 3, 61-64. It is a
more general application of the same principle, to say that the pastor should not shut
himself in to his own church, but should cultivate friendly relations with other pastors
and with other churches, should be present and active at the meetings of Associations
and State Conventions, and at the Anniversaries of the National Societies of the denomination.
His example of friendly interest in the welfare of others will affect his church.
The strong should be taught to help the weak, after the example of Paul in raising
contributions for the poor churches of Judea.
</p>

<pb n='929'/><anchor id='Pg929'/>

<p>
The principle of church independence is not only consistent with, but it absolutely
requires under Christ, all manner of Christian coöperation with other churches; and
Social and Mission Unions to unify the work of the denomination, to secure the starting
of new enterprises, to prevent one church from trenching upon the territory or
appropriating the members of another, are only natural outgrowths of the principle.
President Wayland's remark, <q>He who is displeased with everybody and everything
gives the best evidence that his own temper is defective and that he is a bad associate,</q>
applies to churches as well as to individuals. Each church is to remember that, though
it is honored by the indwelling of the Lord, it constitutes only a part of that great body
of which Christ is the head.
</p>

<p>
See Davidson, Eccl. Polity of the N. T.; Ladd, Principles of Church Polity; and on
the general subject of the Church, Hodge, Essays, 201; Flint, Christ's Kingdom on
Earth, 53-82; Hooker, Ecclesiastical Polity; The Church,&mdash;a collection of essays by
Luthardt, Kahnis, <hi rend='italic'>etc.</hi>; Hiscox, Baptist Church Directory; Ripley, Church Polity;
Harvey, The Church; Crowell, Church Members' Manual; R. W. Dale, Manual of Congregational
Principles; Lightfoot, Com. on Philippians, excursus on the Christian
Ministry; Ross, The Church-Kingdom&mdash;Lectures on Congregationalism; Dexter, Congregationalism,
681-716, as seen in its Literature; Allison, Baptist Councils in America.
For a denial that there is any real apostolic authority for modern church polity, see
O. J. Thatcher, Sketch of the History of the Apostolic Church.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='930'/><anchor id='Pg930'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Ordinances Of The Church.</head>

<p>
By the ordinances, we mean those outward rites which Christ has
appointed to be administered in his church as visible signs of the saving
truth of the gospel. They are signs, in that they vividly express this truth
and confirm it to the believer.
</p>

<p>
In contrast with this characteristically Protestant view, the Romanist
regards the ordinances as actually conferring grace and producing holiness.
Instead of being the external manifestation of a preceding union with
Christ, they are the physical means of constituting and maintaining this
union. With the Romanist, in this particular, sacramentalists of every
name substantially agree. The Papal Church holds to seven sacraments or
ordinances:&mdash;ordination, confirmation, matrimony, extreme unction, penance,
baptism, and the eucharist. The ordinances prescribed in the N. T.,
however, are two and only two, viz.:&mdash;Baptism and the Lord's Supper.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It will be well to distinguish from one another the three words: symbol, rite, and
ordinance. 1. A <emph>symbol</emph> is the sign, or visible representation, of an invisible truth or
idea; as for example, the lion is the symbol of strength and courage, the lamb is the
symbol of gentleness, the olive branch of peace, the sceptre of dominion, the wedding
ring of marriage, and the flag of country. Symbols may teach great lessons; as Jesus'
cursing the barren fig tree taught the doom of unfruitful Judaism, and Jesus' washing of
the disciples' feet taught his own coming down from heaven to purify and save, and the
humble service required of his followers. 2. A <emph>rite</emph> is a symbol which is employed with
regularity and sacred intent. Symbols became rites when thus used. Examples of
authorized rites in the Christian Church are the laying on of hands in ordination, and
the giving of the right hand of fellowship. 3. An <emph>ordinance</emph> is a symbolic rite which
sets forth the central truths of the Christian faith, and which is of universal and perpetual
obligation. Baptism and the Lord's Supper are rites which have become
ordinances by the specific command of Christ and by their inner relation to the essential
truths of his kingdom. No ordinance is a sacrament in the Romanist sense of conferring
grace; but, as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sacramentum</foreign> was the oath taken by the Roman soldier to obey
his commander even unto death, so Baptism and the Lord's Supper are sacraments, in
the sense of vows of allegiance to Christ our Master.
</p>

<p>
President H. G. Weston has recorded his objections to the observance of the so-called
<q>Christian Year,</q> in words that we quote, as showing the danger attending the Romanist
multiplication of ordinances. <q>1. The <q>Christian Year</q> is not Christian. It makes
everything of actions, and nothing of relations. Make a day holy that God has not
made holy, and you thereby make all other days unholy. 2. It limits the Christian's
view of Christ to the scenes and events of his earthly life. Salvation comes through
spiritual relations to a living Lord. The <q>Christian Year</q> makes Christ only a memory,
and not a living, present, personal power. Life, not death, is the typical word of the
N. T. Paul craved, not a knowledge of the fact of the resurrection, but of the power of
it. The New Testament records busy themselves most of all with what Christ is doing
now. 3. The appointments of the <q>Christian Year</q> are not in accord with the N. T.
These appointments lack the reality of spiritual life, and are contrary to the essential
spirit of Christianity.</q> We may add that where the <q>Christian Year</q> is most generally
and rigidly observed, there popular religion is most formal and destitute of spiritual
power.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='931'/><anchor id='Pg931'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Baptism.</head>

<p>
Christian Baptism is the immersion of a believer in water, in token of his
previous entrance into the communion of Christ's death and resurrection,&mdash;or,
in other words, in token of his regeneration through union with Christ.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Baptism an Ordinance of Christ.</head>

<p>
A. Proof that Christ instituted an external rite called baptism.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From the words of the great commission; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) from the injunctions
of the apostles; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) from the fact that the members of the New Testament
churches were baptized believers; (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) from the universal practice of such
a rite in Christian churches of subsequent times.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Go ye therefore, and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mark 16:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved</hi></q>&mdash;we hold,
with Westcott and Hort, that <hi rend='italic'>Mark 16:9-20</hi> is of canonical authority, though probably not
written by Mark himself. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And Peter said unto them, Repent ye, and be baptized every
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ unto the remission of your sins</hi></q>; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:3-5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Or are ye ignorant that
all we who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? We were buried therefore with him through
baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also might walk
in newness of life. For if we have become united with him in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of
his resurrection</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:11, 12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in whom ye were also circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands, in the
putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of Christ; having been buried with him in baptism, wherein ye
were also raised with him through faith in the working of God, who raised him from the dead.</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The only
marked exceptions to the universal requisition of baptism are found in the Society of
Friends, and in the Salvation Army. The Salvation Army does not regard the ordinance
as having any more permanent obligation than feet-washing. General Booth: <q>We
teach our soldiers that every time they break bread, they are to remember the broken
body of the Lord, and every time they wash the body, they are to remind themselves of
the cleansing power of the blood of Christ and of the indwelling Spirit.</q> The Society
of Friends regard Christ's commands as fulfilled, not by any outward baptism of water,
but only by the inward baptism of the Spirit.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. This external rite intended by Christ to be of universal and perpetual
obligation.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Christ recognized John the Baptist's commission to baptize as
derived immediately from heaven.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 21:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven or from men?</hi></q>&mdash;here Jesus clearly intimates
that John's commission to baptize was derived directly from God; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>John 1:25</hi>&mdash;the
delegates sent to the Baptist by the Sanhedrin ask him: <q><hi rend='italic'>Why then baptizest thou, if thou art
not the Christ, neither Elijah, neither the prophet?</hi></q> thus indicating that John's baptism, either in its
form or its application, was a new ordinance that required special divine authorization.
</p>

<p>
Broadus in his American Com. on <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:6</hi>, claims that John's baptism was no modification
of an existing rite. Proselyte baptism is not mentioned in the Mishna (A. D. 200);
the first distinct account of it is in the Babylonian Talmud (Gemara) written in the
fifth century; it was not adopted from the Christians, but was one of the Jewish purifications
which came to be regarded, after the destruction of the Temple, as a peculiar
initiatory rite. There is no mention of it, as a Jewish rite, in the O. T., N. T., Apocrypha,
Philo, or Josephus.
</p>

<p>
For the view that proselyte-baptism did not exist among the Jews before the time of
John, see Schneckenburger, Ueber das Alter der jüdischen Proselytentaufe; Stuart, in
Bib. Repos., 1833:338-355; Toy, In Baptist Quarterly, 1872:301-332. Dr. Toy, however,
in a private note to the author (1884), says: <q>I am disposed now to regard the Christian
rite as borrowed from the Jewish, contrary to my view in 1872.</q> So holds Edersheim,
Life and Times of Jesus, 2:742-744&mdash;<q>We have positive testimony that the baptism of
proselytes existed in the times of Hillel and Shammai. For, whereas the school of
Shammai is said to have allowed a proselyte who was circumcised on the eve of the
Passover, to partake, after baptism, of the Passover, the school of Hillel forbade it.
This controversy must be regarded as proving that at that time [previous to Christ]
the baptism of proselytes was customary.</q>
</p>

<pb n='932'/><anchor id='Pg932'/>

<p>
Porter, on Proselyte Baptism, Hastings' Bible Dict., 4:132&mdash;<q>If circumcision was the
decisive step in the case of all male converts, there seems no longer room for serious
question that a bath of purification must have followed, even though early mention of
such proselyte baptism is not found. The law (<hi rend='italic'>Lev. 11-15</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Num. 19</hi>) prescribed such
baths in all cases of impurity, and one who came with the deep impurity of a heathen
life behind him could not have entered the Jewish community without such cleansing.</q>
Plummer, on Baptism, Hastings' Bible Dict., 1:239&mdash;<q>What is wanted is direct evidence
that, before John the Baptist made so remarkable a use of the rite, it was the custom
to make all proselytes submit to baptism; and such evidence is not forthcoming.
Nevertheless the fact is not really doubtful. It is not credible that the baptizing of
proselytes was instituted and made essential for their admission to Judaism at a period
subsequent to the institution of Christian baptism; and the supposition that it was
borrowed from the rite enjoined by Christ is monstrous.</q>
</p>

<p>
Although the O. T. and the Apocrypha, Josephus and Philo, are silent with regard to
proselyte baptism, it is certain that it existed among the Jews in the early Christian
centuries; and it is almost equally certain that the Jews could not have adopted it from
the Christians. It is probable, therefore, that the baptism of John was an application
to Jews of an immersion which, before that time, was administered to proselytes from
among the Gentiles; and that it was this adaptation of the rite to a new class of subjects
and with a new meaning, which excited the inquiry and criticism of the Sanhedrin. We
must remember, however, that the Lord's Supper was likewise an adaptation of certain
portions of the old Passover service to a new use and meaning. See also Kitto, Bib.
Cyclop., 3:593.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) In his own submission to John's baptism, Christ gave testimony to
the binding obligation of the ordinance (Mat. 3:13-17). John's baptism
was essentially Christian baptism (Acts 19:4), although the full significance
of it was not understood until after Jesus' death and resurrection
(Mat. 20:17-23; Luke 12:50; Rom. 6:3-6).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:13-17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Suffer it now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 19:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>John baptized
with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe on him that should come after him, that
is, on Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 20:18, 19, 22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests and scribes; and they shall
condemn him to death, and shall deliver him unto the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify.... Are ye
able to drink the cup that I am about to drink?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:50</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and
how am I straitened till it be accomplished!</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:3, 4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Or are ye ignorant that all we who were baptized into
Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? We were buried therefore with him through baptism into death: that like as
Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also might walk is newness of life.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Robert Hall, Works, 1:367-399, denies that John's baptism was Christian baptism, and
holds that there is not sufficient evidence that all the apostles were baptized. The fact
that John's baptism was a baptism of faith in the coming Messiah, as well as a baptism
of repentance for past and present sin, refutes this theory. The only difference between
John's baptism, and the baptism of our time, is that John baptized upon profession of
faith in a Savior yet to come; baptism is now administered upon profession of faith in
a Savior who has actually and already come. On John's baptism as presupposing faith
in those who received it, see treatment of the Subjects of Baptism, page <ref target='Pg950'>950</ref>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) In continuing the practice of baptism through his disciples (John
4:1, 2), and in enjoining it upon them as part of a work which was to last
to the end of the world (Mat. 28:19, 20), Christ manifestly adopted and
appointed baptism as the invariable law of his church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 4:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>When therefore the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing
more disciples than John (although Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples)</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19, 20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Go ye therefore,
and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit:
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of
the world.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The analogy of the ordinance of the Lord's Supper also leads to the
conclusion that baptism is to be observed as an authoritative memorial of
Christ and his truth, until his second coming.
</p>

<pb n='933'/><anchor id='Pg933'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye proclaim the Lord's death till he come.</hi></q>
Baptism, like the Lord's Supper, is a teaching ordinance, and the two ordinances together
furnish an indispensable witness to Christ's death and resurrection.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) There is no intimation whatever that the command of baptism is
limited, or to be limited, in its application,&mdash;that it has been or ever is to
be repealed; and, until some evidence of such limitation or repeal is produced,
the statute must be regarded as universally binding.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On the proof that baptism is an ordinance of Christ, see Pepper, in Madison Avenue
Lectures, 85-114; Dagg, Church Order, 9-21.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. The Mode of Baptism.</head>

<p>
This is immersion, and immersion only. This appears from the following
considerations:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. The command to baptize is a command to immerse.</head>

<p>
We show this:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From the meaning of the original word βαπτίζω. That this is to
immerse, appears:
</p>

<p>
First,&mdash;from the usage of Greek writers&mdash;including the church Fathers,
when they do not speak of the Christian rite, and the authors of the Greek
version of the Old Testament.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Liddell and Scott, Greek Lexicon: <q>βαπτίζω, to dip in or under water; Lat. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>immergere</foreign>.</q>
Sophocles, Lexicon of Greek Usage in the Roman and Byzantine Periods, 140
B. C. to 1000 A. D.&mdash;<q>βαπτίζω, to dip, to immerse, to sink ... There is no evidence
that Luke and Paul and the other writers of the N. T. put upon this verb meanings not
recognized by the Greeks.</q> Thayer, N. T. Lexicon: <q>βαπτίζω, literally to dip, to dip
repeatedly, to immerse, to submerge, ... metaphorically, to overwhelm....
βάπτισμα, immersion, submersion ... a rite of sacred immersion commanded by
Christ.</q> Prof. Goodwin of Harvard University, Feb. 13, 1895, says: <q>The classical
meaning of βαπτίζω, which seldom occurs, and of the more common βάπτω, is dip
(literally or metaphorically), and I never heard of its having any other meaning anywhere.
Certainly I never saw a lexicon which gives either sprinkle or pour, as meanings
of either. I must be allowed to ask why I am so often asked this question, which seems
to me to have but one perfectly plain answer.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the International Critical Commentary, see Plummer on Luke, p. 86&mdash;<q>It is only
when baptism is administered by immersion that its full significance is seen</q>; Abbott
on Colossians, p. 251&mdash;<q>The figure was naturally suggested by the immersion in baptism</q>;
see also Gould on Mark, p. 127; Sanday on Romans, p. 154-157. No one of these
four Commentaries was written by a Baptist. The two latest English Bible Dictionaries
agree upon this point. Hastings, Bib. Dict., art.: Baptism, p. 243 a&mdash;<q>The mode of using
was commonly immersion. The symbolism of the ordinance required this</q>; Cheyne,
Encyc. Biblica, 1:473, while arguing from the <hi rend='italic'>Didache</hi> that from a very early date <q>a
triple pouring was admitted where a sufficiency of water could not be had,</q> agrees that
<q>such a method [as immersion] is presupposed as the ideal, at any rate, in Paul's words
about death, burial and resurrection in baptism (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:3-5</hi>).</q>
</p>

<p>
Conant, Appendix to Bible Union Version of Matthew, 1-64, has examples <q>drawn
from writers in almost every department of literature and science; from poets, rhetoricians,
philosophers, critics, historians, geographers; from writers on husbandry, on
medicine, on natural history, on grammar, on theology; from almost every form and
style of composition, romances, epistles, orations, fables, odes, epigrams, sermons, narratives:
from writers of various nations and religions, Pagan, Jew, and Christian,
belonging to many countries and through a long succession of ages. In all, the word
has retained its ground-meaning without change. From the earliest age of Greek
literature down to its close, a period of nearly two thousand years, not an example has
been found in which the word has any other meaning. There is no instance in which it
signifies to make a partial application of water by affusion or sprinkling, or to cleanse,
to purify, apart from the literal act of immersion as the means of cleansing or purifying.</q>
See Stuart, in Bib. Repos., 1833:313; Broadus on Immersion, 57, note.
</p>

<pb n='934'/><anchor id='Pg934'/>

<p>
Dale, in his Classic, Judaic, Christic, and Patristic Baptism, maintains that βάπτω alone
means <q>to dip,</q> and that βαπτίζω never means <q>to dip,</q> but only <q>to put within,</q> giving
no intimation that the object is to be taken out again. But see Review of Dale, by
A. C. Kendrick, in Bap. Quarterly, 1869:129, and by Harvey, in Bap. Review, 1879:141-163.
<q>Plutarch used the word βαπτίζω, when he describes the soldiers of Alexander on a
riotous march as by the roadside dipping (lit.: baptizing) with cups from huge wine
jars and mixing bowls, and drinking to one another. Here we have βαπτίζω used where
Dr. Dale's theory would call for βάπτω. The truth is that βαπτίζω, the stronger word,
came to be used in the same sense with the weaker; and the attempt to prove a broad
and invariable difference of meaning between them breaks down. Of Dr. Dale's three
meanings of βαπτίζω&mdash;(1) intusposition without influence (stone in water), (2) intusposition
with influence (man drowned in water), (3) influence without intusposition,&mdash;the
last is a figment of Dr. Dale's imagination. It would allow me to say that when
I burned a piece of paper, I baptized it. The grand result is this: Beginning with the
position that baptize means immerse, Dr. Dale ends by maintaining that immersion is
not baptism. Because Christ speaks of drinking a cup, Dr. Dale infers that this is baptism.</q>
For a complete reply to Dale, see Ford, Studies on Baptism.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Secondly,&mdash;every passage where the word occurs in the New Testament
either requires or allows the meaning <q>immerse.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:6, 11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I indeed baptize you in water unto repentance ... he shall baptize you in the holy Spirit and in
fire</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>2 Kings 5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Then went he</hi> [Naaman] <hi rend='italic'>down, and dipped himself</hi> ἐβαπτίσατο <hi rend='italic'>seven times in the
Jordan</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mark 1:5, 9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they were baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.... Jesus came from
Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John into the Jordan</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>7:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and when they come from the market-place,
except they bathe</hi> [lit.: <q><hi rend='italic'>baptize</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>themselves, they eat not: and many other things there are, which they have
received to hold, washings</hi> [lit.: <q><hi rend='italic'>baptizings</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>of cups, and pots, and brasen vessels</hi></q>&mdash;in this verse, Westcott
and Hort, with א and B, read ῥαντίσωνται, instead of βαπτίσωνται; but it is easy
to see how subsequent ignorance of Pharisaic scrupulousness might have changed
βαπτίσωνται into ῥαντίσωνται; but not easy to see how ῥαντίσωνται should have been
changed into βαπτίσωνται. On <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 15:2</hi> (and the parallel passage <hi rend='italic'>Mark 7:4</hi>), see Broadus,
Com. on Mat., pages 332, 333. Herodotus, 2:47, says that if any Egyptian touches a
swine in passing, with his clothes, he goes to the river and dips himself from it.
</p>

<p>
Meyer, Com. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>&mdash;<q>ἐὰν μὴ βαπτίσωνται is not to be understood of washing the
hands (Lightfoot, Wetstein), but of immersion, which the word in classic Greek and in
the N. T. everywhere means; here, according to the context, to take a bath.</q> The
Revised Version omits the words <q>and couches,</q> although Maimonides speaks of a
Jewish immersion of couches; see quotation from Maimonides in Ingham, Handbook
of Baptism, 373&mdash;<q>Whenever in the law washing of the flesh or of the clothes is mentioned,
it means nothing else than the dipping of the whole body in a laver; for if any
man dip himself all over except the tip of his little finger, he is still in his uncleanness....
A bed that is wholly defiled, if a man dip it part by part, it is pure.</q> Watson,
in Annotated Par. Bible, 1126.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 11:38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first bathed</hi> [lit.: <q><hi rend='italic'>baptized</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>himself
before dinner</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Ecclesiasticus 31:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that washeth himself after the touching of
a dead body</hi></q> (βαπτιζόμενος ἀπὸ νεκροῦ); <hi rend='italic'>Judith 12:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>washed herself ἐβαπτίζετο in
a fountain of water by the camp</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Lev. 22:4-6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Whoso toucheth anything that is unclean by the
dead ... unclean until the even ... bathe his flesh in water.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:41</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>They then that received his
word were baptized: and there were added unto them in that day about three thousand souls.</hi></q> Although the
water supply of Jerusalem is naturally poor, the artificial provision of aqueducts, cisterns,
and tanks, made water abundant. During the siege of Titus, though thousands
died of famine, we read of no suffering from lack of water. The following are the
dimensions of pools in modern Jerusalem: King's Pool, 15 feet x 16 x 3; Siloam, 53 x 18
x 19; Hezekiah, 240 x 140 x 10; Bethesda (so-called), 360 x 130 x 75; Upper Gihon, 316 x
218 x 19; Lower Gihon, 592 x 260 x 18; see Robinson, Biblical Researches, 1:323-348, and
Samson, Water-supply of Jerusalem, pub. by Am. Bap. Pub. Soc. There was no difficulty
in baptizing three thousand in one day; for, in the time of Chrysostom, when all candidates
of the year were baptized in a single day, three thousand were once baptized;
and, on July 3, 1878, 2222 Telugu Christians were baptized by two administrators in nine
hours. These Telugu baptisms took place at Velumpilly, ten miles north of Ongole.
The same two men did not baptize all the time. There were six men engaged in baptizing,
but never more than two men at the same time.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 16:33</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes; and was baptized, he and all
his, immediately</hi></q>&mdash;the prison was doubtless, as are most large edifices in the East, whether
<pb n='935'/><anchor id='Pg935'/>
public or private, provided with tank and fountain. See Cremer, Lexicon of N. T.
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>sub voce</hi>&mdash;<q>βαπτίζω, immersion or submersion for a religious purpose.</q> Grimm's
ed. of Wilke&mdash;<q>βαπτίζω, 1. Immerse, submerge; 2. Wash or bathe, by immersing or
submerging (<hi rend='italic'>Mark 7:4</hi>, also Naaman and Judith); 3. Figuratively, to overwhelm, as
with debts, misfortunes, <hi rend='italic'>etc.</hi></q> In the N. T. rite, he says it denotes <q>an immersion in
water, intended as a sign of sins washed away, and received by those who wished to be
admitted to the benefits of Messiah's reign.</q>
</p>

<p>
Döllinger, Kirche und Kirchen, 337&mdash;<q>The Baptists are, however, from the Protestant
point of view, unassailable, since for their demand of baptism by submersion they
have the clear Bible text; and the authority of the church and of her testimony is not
regarded by either party</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, by either Baptists or Protestants, generally. Prof.
Harnack, of Giessen, writes in the Independent, Feb. 19, 1885&mdash;<q>1. <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Baptizein</foreign> undoubtedly
signifies immersion (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>eintauchen</foreign>). 2. No proof can be found that it signifies anything
else in the N. T. and in the most ancient Christian literature. The suggestion regarding
a <q>sacred sense</q> is out of the question. 3. There is no passage in the N. T. which
suggests the supposition that any New Testament author attached to the word <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>baptizein</foreign>
any other sense than <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>eintauchen</foreign> = <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>untertauchen</foreign> (immerse, submerge).</q> See
Com. of Meyer, and Cunningham, Croall lectures.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thirdly,&mdash;the absence of any use of the word in the passive voice with
<q>water</q> as its subject confirms our conclusion that its meaning is <q>to
immerse.</q> Water is never said to be baptized upon a man.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From the use of the verb βαπτίζω with prepositions:
</p>

<p>
First,&mdash;with εἰς (Mark 1:9&mdash;where Ἰορδάνην is the element into which
the person passes in the act of being baptized).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mark 1:9, marg.</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of
John into the Jordan.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Secondly,&mdash;with ἐν (Mark 1:5, 8; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Mat. 3:11. John 1:26, 31, 33;
<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Acts 2:2, 4). In these texts, ἐν is to be taken, not instrumentally, but
as indicating the element in which the immersion takes place.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mark 1:5, 8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they were baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.... I baptized you in water;
but he shall baptize you in the Holy Spirit</hi></q>&mdash;here see Meyer's Com. on <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:11</hi>&mdash;<q>ἐν is in accordance
with the meaning of βαπτίζω (immerse), not to be understood instrumentally, but
on the contrary, in the sense of the element in which the immersion takes place.</q>
Those who pray for a <q>baptism of the Holy Spirit</q> pray for such a pouring out of the
Spirit as shall fill the place and permit them to be flooded or immersed in his abundant
presence and power; see C. E. Smith, Baptism of Fire, 1881:305-311. Plumptre: <q>The
baptism with the Holy Ghost would imply that the souls thus baptized would be
plunged, as it were, in that creative and informing Spirit, which was the source of
light and holiness and wisdom.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 67&mdash;<q>The upper room became the Spirit's baptistery.
His presence <q><hi rend='italic'>filled all the house where they were sitting</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:2</hi>).... Baptism in the
Holy Spirit was given once for all on the day of Pentecost, when the Paraclete came in
person to make his abode in the church. It does not follow that every believer has
received this baptism. God's gift is one thing,&mdash;our appropriation of that gift is quite
another thing. Our relation to the second and to the third persons of the Godhead is
exactly parallel in this respect. <q>God so loved the world, that he <emph>gave</emph> his only begotten Son</q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 3:16</hi>).
<q>But as many as <emph>received</emph> him, to them gave he the right to become children of God, even to them that believe on
his name</q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 1:12</hi>). We are required to appropriate the Spirit as sons, in the same way
that we are required to appropriate Christ as sinners.... <q><hi rend='italic'>He breathed on them, and saith unto
them, Receive ye</hi></q>&mdash;take ye, actively&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Holy Spirit</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 20:22</hi>).</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) From circumstances attending the administration of the ordinance
(Mark 1:10&mdash;ἀναβαίνων ἐκ τοῦ ὕδατος; John 3:23&mdash;ὕδατα πολλά; Acts 8:38,
39&mdash;κατέβησαν εἰς τὸ ὕδωρ ... ἀνέβησαν ἐκ τοῦ ὕδατος).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mark 1:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>coming up out of the water</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 3:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And John also was baptizing in Ænon near to Salim,
because there was much water there</hi></q>&mdash;a sufficient depth of water for baptizing; see Prof. W. A.
<pb n='936'/><anchor id='Pg936'/>
Stevens, on Ænon near to Salim, in Journ. Soc. of Bib. Lit. and Exegesis, Dec. 1883.
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 8:38, 39</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him. And
when they came up out of the water....</hi></q> In the case of Philip and the eunuch, President
Timothy Dwight, in S. S. Times, Aug. 27, 1892, says: <q>The baptism was apparently by
immersion.</q> The Editor adds that <q>practically scholars are agreed that the primitive
meaning of the word 'baptize' was to immerse.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) From figurative allusions to the ordinance.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mark 10:38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Are ye able to drink the cup that I drink? or to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized
with?</hi></q>&mdash;here the cup is the cup of suffering in Gethsemane; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Luke 22:42</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Father, if thou
be willing, remove this cup from me</hi></q>; and the baptism is the baptism of death on Calvary, and
of the grave that was to follow; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:50</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I
straitened till it be accomplished!</hi></q> Death presented itself to the Savior's mind as a baptism,
because it was a sinking under the floods of suffering. <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We were buried therefore
with him through baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, so
we also might walk in newness of life</hi></q>&mdash;Conybeare and Howson, Life and Epistles of St. Paul,
say, on this passage, that <q>it cannot be understood without remembering that the
primitive method of baptism was by immersion.</q> On <hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:49, marg.</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I came to cast fire upon
the earth, and how would I that it were already kindled!</hi></q>&mdash;see Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 2:225&mdash;<q>He
knew that he was called to bring a new energy and movement into the world, which
mightily seizes and draws everything towards it, as a hurled firebrand, which whereever
it falls kindles a flame which expands into a vast sea of fire</q>&mdash;the baptism of
fire, the baptism in the Holy Spirit?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all baptized unto
Moses in the cloud and in the sea</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>having been buried with him in baptism, wherein ye were also
raised with him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and having our body washed</hi>
[λελουμένοι] <hi rend='italic'>with pure water</hi></q>&mdash;here Trench, N. T. Synonyms, 216, 217, says that <q>λούω
implies always, not the bathing of a part of the body, but of the whole.</q> <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet 3:20,
21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>saved through water: which also after a true likeness doth now save you, even baptism, not the putting away
of the filth of the flesh, but the interrogation of a good conscience toward God, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ</hi></q>&mdash;as
the ark whose sides were immersed in water saved Noah, so the immersion of
believers typically saves them; that is, the answer of a good conscience, the turning
of the soul to God, which baptism symbolizes. <q>In the ritual of Moses and Aaron,
three things were used: oil, blood, and water. The oil was poured, the blood was
sprinkled, the water was used for complete ablution first of all, and subsequently for
partial ablution to those to whom complete ablution had been previously administered</q>
(Wm. Ashmore).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) From the testimony of church history as to the practice of the early
church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Tertullian, De Baptismo, chap. 12&mdash;<q>Others make the suggestion (forced enough,
clearly) that the apostles then served the turn of baptism when in their little ship they
were sprinkled and covered with the waves; that Peter himself also was immersed
enough when he walked on the sea. It is however, as I think, one thing to be sprinkled
or intercepted by the violence of the sea; another thing to be baptized in obedience to
the discipline of religion.</q> Fisher, Beginnings of Christianity, 565&mdash;<q>Baptism, it is now
generally agreed among scholars, was commonly administered by immersion.</q> Schaff,
History of the Apostolic Church, 570&mdash;<q>Respecting the form of baptism, the impartial
historian is compelled by exegesis and history substantially to yield the point to the
Baptists.</q> Elsewhere Dr. Schaff says: <q>The baptism of Christ in the Jordan, and the
illustrations of baptism used in the N. T., are all in favor of immersion, rather than of
sprinkling, as is freely admitted by the best exegetes, Catholic and Protestant, English
and German. Nothing can be gained by unnatural exegesis. The persistency and
aggressiveness of Baptists have driven pedobaptists to opposite extremes.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dean Stanley, in his address at Eton College, March, 1879, on Historical Aspects of
American Churches, speaks of immersion as <q>the primitive, apostolical, and, till the 13th
century, the universal, mode of baptism, which is still retained throughout the Eastern
churches, and which is still in our own church as positively enjoined in theory as it is
universally neglected in practice.</q> The same writer, in the Nineteenth Century, Oct.
1879, says that <q>the change from immersion to sprinkling has set aside the larger part
of the apostolic language regarding baptism, and has altered the very meaning of the
word.</q> Neander, Church Hist., 1:310&mdash;<q>In respect to the form of baptism, it was, in
<pb n='937'/><anchor id='Pg937'/>
conformity with the original institution and the original import of the symbol, performed
by immersion, as a sign of entire baptism into the Holy Spirit, of being entirely
penetrated by the same.... It was only with the sick, where exigency required it,
that any exception was made. Then it was administered by sprinkling; but many
superstitious persons imagined such sprinkling to be not fully valid, and stigmatized
those thus baptized as clinics.</q>
</p>

<p>
Until recently, there has been no evidence that clinic baptism, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, the baptism of a
sick or dying person in bed by pouring water copiously around him, was practised
earlier than the time of Novatian, in the third century; and in these cases there is good
reason to believe that a regenerating efficacy was ascribed to the ordinance. We are
now, however, compelled to recognize a departure from N. T. precedent somewhat
further back. Important testimony is that of Prof. Harnack, of Giessen, in the Independent
of Feb. 19, 1885&mdash;<q>Up to the present moment we possess no certain proof from
the period of the second century, in favor of the fact that baptism by aspersion was
then even facultatively administered; for Tertullian (De Pœnit., 6, and De Baptismo,
12) is uncertain; and the age of those pictures upon which is represented a baptism by
aspersion is not certain. The <q>Teaching of the Twelve Apostles,</q> however, has now
instructed us that already, in very early times, people in the church took no offence
when aspersion was put in place of immersion, when any kind of outward circumstances
might render immersion impossible or impracticable.... But the rule was
also certainly maintained that immersion was obligatory if the outward conditions of
such a performance were at hand.</q> This seems to show that, while the corruption of
the N. T. rite began soon after the death of the apostles, baptism by any other form
than immersion was even then a rare exception, which those who introduced the
change sought to justify upon the plea of necessity. See Schaff, Teaching of the
Twelve Apostles, 29-57, and other testimony in Coleman, Christian Antiquities, 275;
Stuart, in Bib. Repos., 1883:355-363.
</p>

<p>
The <q>Teaching of the Twelve Apostles,</q> section 7, reads as follows: <q>Baptize ...
in living water. And if thou have no living water, baptize in other water; and if thou
canst not in cold, then in warm. And if thou have neither, pour water upon the head
thrice.</q> Here it is evident that <q>baptize</q> means only <q>immerse,</q> but if water be scarce
pouring may be substituted for baptism. Dr. A. H. Newman, Antipedobaptism, 5,
says that <q>The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles</q> may possibly belong to the second
half of the second century, but in its present form is probably much later. It does not
explicitly teach baptismal regeneration, but this view seems to be implied in the requirement,
in case of an absolute lack of a sufficiency of water of any kind for baptism
proper, that pouring water on the head three times be resorted to as a substitute.
Catechetical instruction, repentance, fasting, and prayer, must precede the baptismal
rite.
</p>

<p>
Dexter, in his True Story of John Smyth and Sebaptism, maintains that immersion
was a new thing in England in 1641. But if so, it was new, as Congregationalism was
new&mdash;a newly restored practice and ordinance of apostolic times. For reply to Dexter,
see Long, in Bap. Rev., Jan. 1883:12, 13, who tells us, on the authority of Blunt's Ann.
Book of Com. Prayer, that from 1085 to 1549, the <q>Salisbury Use</q> was the accepted
mode, and this provided for the child's trine immersion. <q>The Prayerbook of Edward
VI succeeded to the Salisbury Use in 1549; but in this too immersion has the place of
honor&mdash;affusion is only for the weak. The English church has never sanctioned
sprinkling (Blunt, 226). In 1664, the Westminster Assembly said 'sprinkle or pour,'
thus annulling what Christ commanded 1600 years before. Queen Elizabeth was
immersed in 1533. If in 1641 immersion had been so generally and so long disused that
men saw it with wonder and regarded it as a novelty, then the more distinct, emphatic,
and peculiarly their own was the work of the Baptists. They come before the world,
with no partners, or rivals, or abettors, or sympathizers, as the restorers and preservers
of Christian baptism.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) From the doctrine and practice of the Greek church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
DeStourdza, the greatest modern theologian of the Greek church, writes; <q>βαπτίζω
signifies literally and always <q>to plunge.</q> Baptism and immersion are therefore identical,
and to say <q>baptism by aspersion</q> is as if one should say <q>immersion by aspersion,</q>
or any other absurdity of the same nature. The Greek church maintain that the Latin
church, instead of a βαπτισμός, practice a mere ῥαντισμός,&mdash;instead of baptism, a mere
sprinkling</q>&mdash;quoted in Conant on Mat., appendix, 99. See also Broadus on Immersion,
18.
</p>

<pb n='938'/><anchor id='Pg938'/>

<p>
The evidence that immersion is the original mode of baptism is well summed up by
Dr. Marcus Dods, in his article on Baptism in Hastings' Dictionary of Christ and the
Apostles. Dr. Dods defines baptism as <q>a rite wherein by immersion in water the participant
symbolizes and signalizes his transition from an impure to a pure life, his death
to a past he abandons, and his birth to a future he desires.</q> As regards the <q>mode of
baptism,</q> he remarks: <q>That the normal mode was by immersion of the whole body
may be inferred (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) from the meaning of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>baptizo</foreign>, which is the intensive or frequentative
form of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bapto</foreign>, <q>I dip,</q> and denotes to <emph>immerse</emph> or <emph>submerge</emph>&mdash;the point is, that
<q>dip</q> or <q>immerse</q> is the primary, <q>wash</q> the secondary meaning of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bapto</foreign> or <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>baptizo</foreign>.
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The same inference may be drawn from the law laid down regarding the baptism
of proselytes: <q>As soon as he grows whole of the wound of circumcision, they bring
him to baptism, and being placed in the water, they again instruct him in some weightier
and in some lighter commands of the Law, which being heard, he plunges himself
and comes up, and behold, he is an Israelite in all things</q> (Lightfoot's Horæ Hebraicæ).
To use Pauline language, his old man is dead and buried in water, and he rises from this
cleansing grave a new man. The full significance of the rite would have been lost had
immersion not been practised. Again, it was required in proselyte baptism that <q>every
person baptized must dip his whole body, now stripped and made naked, at one dipping.
And wheresoever in the Law washing of the body or garments is mentioned, it means
nothing else than the washing of the whole body.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That immersion was the mode
of baptism adopted by John is the natural conclusion from his choosing the neighborhood
of the Jordan as the scene of his labors; and from the statement of <hi rend='italic'>John 3:23</hi>
that he was baptizing in Enon <q>because there was much water there.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) That this
form was continued in the Christian Church appears from the expression <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Loutron
palingenesias</foreign> (bath of regeneration, <hi rend='italic'>Titus 3:5</hi>), and from the use made by St. Paul in
<hi rend='italic'>Romans 6</hi> of the symbolism. This is well put by Bingham (Antiquities xi.2).</q> The
author quotes Bingham to the effect that <q>total immersion under water</q> was the universal
practice during the early Christian centuries <q>except in some particular cases of
exigence, wherein they allow of sprinkling, as in the case of a clinic baptism, or where
there is a scarcity of water.</q> Dr. Dods continues: <q>This statement exactly reflects
the ideas of the Pauline Epistles and the '<hi rend='italic'>Didache</hi>'</q> (Teaching of the Twelve
Apostles).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The prevailing usage of any word determines the sense it bears, when
found in a command of Christ. We have seen, not only that the prevailing
usage of the Greek language determines the meaning of the word
<q>baptize</q> to be <q>immerse,</q> but that this is its fundamental, constant, and
only meaning. The original command to baptize is therefore a command
to immerse.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As evidence that quite diverse sections of the Christian world are coming to recognize
the original form of baptism to be immersion, we may cite the fact that a memorial
to the late Archbishop of Canterbury has recently been erected in the parish
church of Lambeth, and that it is in the shape of a <q>font-grave,</q> in which a believer
can be buried with Christ in baptism; and also that the Rev. G. Campbell Morgan has
had a baptistery constructed in the newly renovated Westminster Congregational
Church in London.
</p>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 2:211&mdash;<q>As in the case of the Lord's Supper, so did
Baptism also first receive its sacramental significance through Paul. As he saw in the
immersing under water the symbolical repetition of the death and resurrection of
Christ, baptism appeared to him as the act of spiritual dying and renovation, or
regeneration, of incorporation into the mystical body of Christ, that 'new creation.'
As for Paul the baptism of adults only was in question, faith in Christ is already of
course presupposed by it, and baptism is just the act in which faith realizes the decisive
resolution of giving one's self up actually as belonging to Christ and his community.
Yet the outward act is not on that account a mere semblance of what is already
present in faith, but according to the mysticism common to Paul with the whole
ancient world, the symbolical act effectuates what it typifies, and therefore in this
case the mortification of the carnal man and the animation of the spiritual man.</q> For
the view that sprinkling or pouring constitutes valid baptism, see Hall, Mode of Baptism.
<hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Hovey, in Baptist Quarterly, April, 1875; Wayland, Principles
and Practices of Baptists, 85; Carson, Noel, Judson, and Pengilly, on Baptism; especially
recent and valuable is Burrage, Act of Baptism.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='939'/><anchor id='Pg939'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. No church has the right to modify or dispense with this command
of Christ.</head>

<p>
This is plain:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From the nature of the church. Notice:
</p>

<p>
First,&mdash;that, besides the local church, no other visible church of Christ
is known to the New Testament. Secondly,&mdash;that the local church is not
a legislative, but is simply an executive, body. Only the authority which
originally imposed its laws can amend or abrogate them. Thirdly,&mdash;that
the local church cannot delegate to any organization or council of churches
any power which it does not itself rightfully possess. Fourthly,&mdash;that the
opposite principle puts the church above the Scriptures and above Christ,
and would sanction all the usurpations of Rome.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 5:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called
least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, he shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>2 Sam. 6:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his
error; and there he died by the ark of God.</hi></q> Shakespeare, Henry VI, Part I, 2:4&mdash;<q>Faith, I have
been a truant in the law, And never yet could frame my will to it, And therefore frame
the law unto my will.</q> As at the Reformation believers rejoiced to restore communion
in both kinds, so we should rejoice to restore baptism as to its subjects and as to its
meaning. To administer it to a wailing and resisting infant, or to administer it in any
other form than that prescribed by Jesus' command and example, is to desecrate and
destroy the ordinance.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From the nature of God's command:
</p>

<p>
First,&mdash;as forming a part, not only of the law, but of the fundamental
law, of the church of Christ. The power claimed for a church to change
it is not only legislative but constitutional. Secondly,&mdash;as expressing the
wisdom of the Lawgiver. Power to change the command can be claimed
for the church, only on the ground that Christ has failed to adapt the
ordinance to changing circumstances, and has made obedience to it unnecessarily
difficult and humiliating. Thirdly,&mdash;as providing in immersion the
only adequate symbol of those saving truths of the gospel which both of
the ordinances have it for their office to set forth, and without which they
become empty ceremonies and forms. In other words, the church has no
right to change the method of administering the ordinance, because such a
change vacates the ordinance of its essential meaning. As this argument,
however, is of such vital importance, we present it more fully in a special
discussion of the Symbolism of Baptism.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Abraham Lincoln, in his debates with Douglas, ridiculed the idea that there could be
any constitutional way of violating the Constitution. F. L. Anderson: <q>In human
governments we change the constitution to conform to the will of the people; in the
divine government we change the will of the people to conform to the Constitution.</q>
For advocacy of the church's right to modify the form of an ordinance, see Coleridge,
Aids to Reflection, in Works, 1:333-348&mdash;<q>Where a ceremony answered, and was
intended to answer, several purposes which at its first institution were blended in
respect of the time, but which afterward, by change of circumstances, were necessarily
disunited, then either the church hath no power or authority delegated to her, or she
must be authorized to choose and determine to which of the several purposes the ceremony
should be attached.</q> Baptism, for example, at the first symbolized not only
entrance into the church of Christ, but personal faith in him as Savior and Lord. It is
assumed that entrance into the church and personal faith are now necessarily disunited.
Since baptism is in charge of the church, she can attach baptism to the former, and
not to the latter.
</p>

<p>
We of course deny that the separation of baptism from faith is ever necessary. We
maintain, on the contrary, that thus to separate the two is to pervert the ordinance,
<pb n='940'/><anchor id='Pg940'/>
and to make it teach the doctrine of hereditary church membership and salvation by
outward manipulation apart from faith. We say with Dean Stanley (on Baptism, in
the Nineteenth Century, Oct. 1879), though not, as he does, with approval, that the
change in the method of administering the ordinance shows <q>how the spirit that lives
and moves in human society can override the most sacred ordinances.</q> We cannot
with him call this spirit <q>the free spirit of Christianity,</q>&mdash;we regard it rather as an
evil spirit of disobedience and unbelief. <q>Baptists are therefore pledged to prosecute
the work of the Reformation until the church shall return to the simple forms it
possessed under the apostles</q> (G. M. Stone). See Curtis, Progress of Baptist Principles,
234-245.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Objections</hi>: 1. Immersion is often impracticable.&mdash;We reply that, when really impracticable,
it is no longer a duty. Where the will to obey is present, but providential
circumstances render outward obedience impossible, Christ takes the will for the deed.
</p>

<p>
2. It is often dangerous to health and life.&mdash;We reply that, when it is really dangerous,
it is no longer a duty. But then, we have no warrant for substituting another
act for that which Christ has commanded. Duty demands simple delay until it can be
administered with safety. It must be remembered that ardent feeling nerves even the
body. <q>Brethren, if your hearts be warm, Ice and snow can do no harm.</q> The cold
climate of Russia does not prevent the universal practice of immersion by the Greek
church of that country.
</p>

<p>
3. It is indecent.&mdash;We reply, that there is need of care to prevent exposure, but that
with this care there is no indecency, more than in fashionable sea-bathing. The argument
is valid only against a careless administration of the ordinance, not against
immersion itself.
</p>

<p>
4. It is inconvenient.&mdash;We reply that, in a matter of obedience to Christ, we are not
to consult convenience. The ordinance which symbolizes his sacrificial death, and our
spiritual death with him, may naturally involve something of inconvenience, but joy
in submitting to that inconvenience will be a test of the spirit of obedience. When the
act is performed, it should be performed as Christ enjoined.
</p>

<p>
5. Other methods of administration have been blessed to those who submitted to
them.&mdash;We reply that God has often condescended to human ignorance, and has given
his Spirit to those who honestly sought to serve him, even by erroneous forms, such as
the Mass. This, however, is not to be taken as a divine sanction of the error, much less
as a warrant for the perpetuation of a false system on the part of those who know that
it is a violation of Christ's commands. It is, in great part, the position of its advocates,
as representatives of Christ and his church, that gives to this false system its power
for evil.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. The Symbolism of Baptism.</head>

<p>
Baptism symbolizes the previous entrance of the believer into the communion
of Christ's death and resurrection,&mdash;or, in other words, regeneration
through union with Christ.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. Expansion of this statement as to the symbolism of baptism.</head>

<p>
Baptism,
more particularly, is a symbol:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Of the death and resurrection of Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Or are ye ignorant that all we who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?</hi></q>
<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mat 3:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mark 10:38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Are
ye able to drink the cup that I drink? or to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:50</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But
I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>buried
with him in baptism, wherein ye were also raised with him through faith in the working of God, who raised
him from the dead.</hi></q> For the meaning of these passages, see note on the baptism of Jesus,
under B. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>), pages <ref target='Pg942'>942</ref>, <ref target='Pg943'>943</ref>.
</p>

<p>
Denney, in Expositor's Greek Testament, on <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:3-5</hi>&mdash;<q>The argumentative requirements
of the passage ... demand the idea of an actual union to, or incorporation in
Christ.... We were buried with him [in the act of immersion] through that baptism
into his death.... If the baptism, <hi rend='italic'>which is a similitude of Christ's death</hi>, has had a
reality answering to its obvious import, so that we have really died in it as Christ died,
then we shall have a corresponding experience of resurrection. Baptism, inasmuch as
one emerges from the water after being immersed, is a similitude of resurrection as
well as of death.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='941'/><anchor id='Pg941'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Of the purpose of that death and resurrection,&mdash;namely, to atone
for sin, and to deliver sinners from its penalty and power.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We were buried therefore with him through baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised from
the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also might walk in newness of life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>7, 10, 11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>for he that hath
died is justified from sin.... For the death that he died, he died unto sin once: but the life that he liveth, he liveth
unto God. Even so reckon ye also yourselves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>we
thus judge, that one died for all, therefore all died.</hi></q> Baptism is therefore a confession of evangelical
faith both as to sin, and as to the deity and atonement of Christ. No one is properly
a Baptist who does not acknowledge these truths which baptism signifies.
</p>

<p>
T. W. Chambers, in Presb. and Ref. Rev., Jan. 1890:113-118, objects that this view of
the symbolism of baptism is based on two texts, <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:4</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:12</hi>, which are illustrative
and not explanatory, while the great majority of passages make baptism only
an act of purification. Yet Dr. Chambers concedes: <q>It is to be admitted that nearly
all modern critical expositors (Meyer, Godet, Alford, Conybeare, Lightfoot, Beet)
consider that there is a reference here [in <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:4</hi>] to the act of baptism, which, as
the Bishop of Durham says, <q>is the grave of the old man and the birth of the new&mdash;an
image of the believer's participation both in the death and in the resurrection of Christ....
As he sinks beneath the baptismal waters, the believer buries there all his corrupt
affections and past sins; as he emerges thence, he rises regenerate, quickened to new
hopes and a new life.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Of the accomplishment of that purpose in the person baptized,&mdash;who
thus professes his death to sin and resurrection to spiritual life.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 3:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For as many of you as were baptized into Christ did put on Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 3:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>which</hi> [water]
<hi rend='italic'>also after a true likeness doth now save you, even baptism, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the interrogation
of a good conscience toward God, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 2:19, 20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For I through
the law died unto the law, that I might live unto God. I have been crucified with Christ; and it is no longer I that
live, but Christ liveth in me: and that life which I now live in the flesh I live in faith, the faith which is in the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave himself up for me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 3:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For ye died, and your life is hid with Christ in God.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
C. H. M.: <q>A truly baptized person is one who has passed from the old world into the
new.... The water rolls over his person, signifying that his place in nature is ignored,
that his old nature is entirely set aside, in short, that he is a dead man, that the flesh
with all that pertained thereto&mdash;its sins and its liabilities&mdash;is buried in the grave of
Christ and can never come into God's sight again.... When the believer rises up
from the water, expression is given to the truth that he comes up as the possessor of a
new life, even the resurrection life of Christ, to which divine righteousness inseparably
attaches.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Of the method in which that purpose is accomplished,&mdash;by union
with Christ, receiving him and giving one's self to him by faith.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For if we have become united</hi> [σύμφυτοι] <hi rend='italic'>with him in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in
the likeness of his resurrection</hi></q>&mdash;σύμφυτοι, or συμπεφυκώς, is used of the man and the horse as
grown together in the Centaur, by Lucian, Dial. Mort., 16:4, and by Xenophon, Cyrop.,
4:3:18. <hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>having been buried with him in baptism, wherein ye were also raised with him through
faith in the working of God, who raised him from the dead.</hi></q> Dr. N. S. Burton: <q>The oneness of the
believer and Christ is expressed by the fact that the one act of immersion sets forth
the death and resurrection of both Christ and the believer.</q> As the voluntary element
in faith has two parts, a giving and a taking, so baptism illustrates both. Submergence = surrender
to Christ; emergence = reception of Christ; see page <ref target='Pg839'>839</ref>, (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>). <q><hi rend='italic'>Putting
on Christ</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 3:27</hi>) is the burying of the old life and the rising to a new. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> the active
and the passive obedience of Christ (pages 749, 770), the two elements of justification
(pages <ref target='Pg854'>854-859</ref>), the two aspects of formal worship (page 23), the two divisions of the
Lord's Prayer.
</p>

<p>
William Ashmore holds that incorporation into Christ is the root idea of baptism,
union with Christ's death and resurrection being only a part of it. We are <q><hi rend='italic'>baptized into
Christ</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:3</hi>), as the Israelites were <q><hi rend='italic'>baptized into Moses</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:2</hi>). As baptism symbolizes
the incorporation of the believer into Christ, so the Lord's Supper symbolizes the
incorporation of Christ into the believer. We go down into the water, but the bread
goes down into us. We are <q><emph>in Christ</emph>,</q> and Christ is <q><emph>in us</emph>.</q> The candidate does not
baptize himself, but puts himself wholly into the hands of the administrator. This
<pb n='942'/><anchor id='Pg942'/>
seems symbolic of his committing himself entirely to Christ, of whom the administrator
is the representative. Similarly in the Lord's Supper, it is Christ who through his
representative distributes the emblems of his death and life.
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson regarded baptism as implying: 1. death to sin; 2. resurrection to
new life in Christ; 3. entire surrender of ourselves to the authority of the triune God.
Baptism <q><hi rend='italic'>into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat 28:19</hi>) cannot imply
supreme allegiance to the Father, and only subordinate allegiance to the Son. Baptism
therefore is an assumption of supreme allegiance to Jesus Christ. N. E. Wood, in The
Watchman, Dec. 3, 1896, 15&mdash;<q>Calvinism has its five points; but Baptists have also their
own five points: the Trinity, the Atonement, Regeneration, Baptism, and an inspired
Bible. All other doctrines gather round these.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) Of the consequent union of all believers in Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>one Lord, one faith, one baptism</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For in one Spirit were we all baptized into one
body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bond or free; and were all made to drink of one Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>10:3, 4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and
did all eat the same spiritual food; and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of a spiritual rock that
followed them: and the rock was Christ.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:5</hi>, it is noticeable that, not the Lord's Supper, but baptism, is referred to as
the symbol of Christian unity. A. H. Strong, Cleveland Sermon, 1904&mdash;<q>Our fathers
lived in a day when simple faith was subject to serious disabilities. The establishments
frowned upon dissent and visited it with pains and penalties. It is no wonder that
believers in the New Testament doctrine and polity felt that they must come out from
what they regarded as an apostate church. They could have no sympathy with those
who held back the truth in unrighteousness and persecuted the saints of God. But our
doctrine has leavened all Christendom. Scholarship is on the side of immersion. Infant
baptism is on the decline. The churches that once opposed us now compliment us on
our stedfastness in the faith and on our missionary zeal. There is a growing spirituality
in these churches, which prompts them to extend to us hands of fellowship.
And there is a growing sense among us that the kingdom of Christ is wider than our
own membership, and that loyalty to our Lord requires us to recognize his presence
and blessing even in bodies which we do not regard as organized in complete accordance
with the New Testament model. Faith in the larger Christ is bringing us out
from our denominational isolation into an inspiring recognition of our oneness with
the universal church of God throughout the world.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) Of the death and resurrection of the body,&mdash;which will complete
the work of Christ in us, and which Christ's death and resurrection assure
to all his members.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:12, 22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now if Christ is preached that he hath been raised from the dead, how say some among you that
there is no resurrection of the dead?... For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive.</hi></q> In the
Scripture passages quoted above, we add to the argument from the meaning of the
word βαπτίζω the argument from the meaning of the ordinance. Luther wrote, in his
Babylonish Captivity of the Church, section 103 (English translation in Wace and Buchheim,
First Principles of the Reformation, 192): <q>Baptism is a sign both of death and
resurrection. Being moved by this reason, I would have those that are baptized to be
altogether dipped into the water, as the word means and the mystery signifies.</q> See
Calvin on <hi rend='italic'>Acts 8:38</hi>; Conybeare and Howson on <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:4</hi>; Boardman, in Madison Avenue
Lectures, 115-135.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. Inferences from the passages referred to.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The central truth set forth by baptism is the death and resurrection
of Christ,&mdash;and our own death and resurrection only as connected with that.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The baptism of Jesus in Jordan, equally with the subsequent baptism of his followers,
was a symbol of his death. It was his death which he had in mind, when he said:
<q><hi rend='italic'>Are ye able to drink the cup that I drink? or to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mark
10:38</hi>); <q><hi rend='italic'>But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:50</hi>).
The being immersed and overwhelmed in waters is a frequent metaphor in all languages
to express the rush of successive troubles; compare <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 69:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I am come into deep waters,
where the floods overflow me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>42:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>All thy waves and thy billows are gone over me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>124:4, 5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Then the
waters had overwhelmed us, The stream had gone over our soul; Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.</hi></q>
</p>

<pb n='943'/><anchor id='Pg943'/>

<p>
So the suffering, death, and burial, which were before our Lord, presented themselves
to his mind as a baptism, because the very idea of baptism was that of a complete submersion
under the floods of waters. Death was not to be poured upon Christ,&mdash;it was
no mere sprinkling of suffering which he was to endure, but a sinking into the mighty
waters, and a being overwhelmed by them. It was the giving of himself to this, which
he symbolized by his baptism in Jordan. That act was not arbitrary, or formal, or
ritual. It was a public consecration, a consecration to death, to death for the sins of
the world. It expressed the essential nature and meaning of his earthly work: the
baptism of water at the beginning of his ministry consciously and designedly prefigured
the baptism of death with which that ministry was to close.
</p>

<p>
Jesus' submission to John's baptism of repentance, the rite that belonged only to
sinners, can be explained only upon the ground that he was <q><hi rend='italic'>made to be sin on our behalf</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:21</hi>). He had taken our nature upon him, without its hereditary corruption
indeed, but with all its hereditary guilt, that he might redeem that nature and reunite
it to God. As one with humanity, he had in his unconscious childhood submitted to
the rites of circumcision, purification, and legal redemption (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 2:21-24</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Ex. 13:2, 13</hi>;
see Lange, Alford, Webster and Wilkinson on <hi rend='italic'>Luke 2:24</hi>)&mdash;all of them rites appointed
for sinners. <q><hi rend='italic'>Made in the likeness of men</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 2:7</hi>), <q><hi rend='italic'>the likeness of sinful flesh</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:3</hi>), he was <q><hi rend='italic'>to
put away sin by the sacrifice of himself</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 9:26</hi>).
</p>

<p>
In his baptism, therefore, he could say, <q><hi rend='italic'>Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:15</hi>)
because only through the final baptism of suffering and death, which this baptism in
water foreshadowed, could he <q><hi rend='italic'>make an end of sins</hi></q> and <q><hi rend='italic'>bring in everlasting righteousness</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Dan.
9:24</hi>) to the condemned and ruined world. He could not be <q><hi rend='italic'>the Lord our Righteousness</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Jer. 23:6</hi>) except by first suffering the death due to the nature he had assumed, thereby
delivering it from its guilt and perfecting it forever. All this was indicated in that act
by which he was first <q><hi rend='italic'>made manifest to Israel</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 1:31</hi>). In his baptism in Jordan, he was
buried in the likeness of his coming death, and raised in the likeness of his coming
resurrection. <hi rend='italic'>1 John 5:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ; not in the water only,
but in the water and in the blood</hi></q> = in the baptism of water at the beginning of his ministry,
and in the baptism of blood with which that ministry was to close.
</p>

<p>
As that baptism pointed forward to Jesus' death, so our baptism points backward to
the same, as the centre and substance of his redeeming work, the one death by which
we live. We who are <q><hi rend='italic'>baptized into Christ</hi></q> are <q><hi rend='italic'>baptized into his death</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:3</hi>), that is, into
spiritual communion and participation in that death which he died for our salvation;
in short, in baptism we declare in symbol that his death has become ours. On the Baptism
of Jesus, see A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 226-237.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The correlative truth of the believer's death and resurrection, set
forth in baptism, implies, first,&mdash;confession of sin and humiliation on
account of it, as deserving of death; secondly,&mdash;declaration of Christ's
death for sin, and of the believer's acceptance of Christ's substitutionary
work; thirdly,&mdash;acknowledgment that the soul has become partaker of
Christ's life, and now lives only in and for him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A false mode of administering the ordinance has so obscured the meaning of baptism
that it has to multitudes lost all reference to the death of Christ, and the Lord's Supper
is assumed to be the only ordinance which is intended to remind us of the atoning sacrifice
to which we owe our salvation. For evidence of this, see the remarks of President
Woolsey in the Sunday School Times: <q>Baptism it [the Christian religion] could share
in with the doctrine of John the Baptist, and if a similar rite had existed under the
Jewish law, it would have been regarded as appropriate to a religion which inculcated
renunciation of sin and purity of heart and life. But [in the Lord's Supper] we go
beyond the province of baptism to the very <foreign rend='italic'>penetrale</foreign> of the gospel, to the efficacy and
meaning of Christ's death.</q>
</p>

<p>
Baptism should be a public act. We cannot afford to relegate it to a corner, or to
celebrate it in private, as some professedly Baptist churches of England are said to do.
Like marriage, the essence of it is the joining of ourselves to another before the world.
In baptism we merge ourselves in Christ, before God and angels and men. The Mohammedan
stands five times a day, and prays with his face toward Mecca, caring not who
sees him. <hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Every one who shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before
the angels of God.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='944'/><anchor id='Pg944'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Baptism symbolizes purification, but purification in a peculiar and
divine way,&mdash;namely, through the death of Christ and the entrance of the
soul into communion with that death. The radical defect of sprinkling or
pouring as a mode of administering the ordinance, is that it does not point
to Christ's death as the procuring cause of our purification.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It is a grievous thing to say by symbol, as those do say who practice sprinkling in
place of immersion, that a man may regenerate himself, or, if not this, yet that his
regeneration may take place without connection with Christ's death. Edward Beecher's
chief argument against Baptist views is drawn from <hi rend='italic'>John 3:22-25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>a questioning on the part of
John's disciples with a Jew about purifying.</hi></q> Purification is made to be the essential meaning of
baptism, and the conclusion is drawn that any form expressive of purification will
answer the design of the ordinance. But if Christ's death is the procuring cause of our
purification, we may expect it to be symbolized in the ordinance which declares that
purification; if Christ's death is the central fact of Christianity, we may expect it to be
symbolized in the initiatory rite of Christianity.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) In baptism we show forth the Lord's death as the original source of
holiness and life in our souls, just as in the Lord's Supper we show forth
the Lord's death as the source of all nourishment and strength after this
life of holiness has been once begun. As the Lord's Supper symbolizes
the sanctifying power of Jesus' death, so baptism symbolizes its regenerating
power.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The truth of Christ's death and resurrection is a precious jewel, and it is given us in
these outward ordinances as in a casket. Let us care for the casket lest we lose the
gem. As a scarlet thread runs through every rope and cord of the British navy, testifying
that it is the property of the Crown, so through every doctrine and ordinance of
Christianity runs the red line of Jesus' blood. It is their common reference to the
death of Christ that binds the two ordinances together.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) There are two reasons, therefore, why nothing but immersion will
satisfy the design of the ordinance: first,&mdash;because nothing else can symbolize
the radical nature of the change effected in regeneration&mdash;a change
from spiritual death to spiritual life; secondly,&mdash;because nothing else can
set forth the fact that this change is due to the entrance of the soul into
communion with the death and resurrection of Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Christian truth is an organism. Part is bound to part, and all together constitute one
vitalized whole. To give up any single portion of that truth is like maiming the human
body. Life may remain, but one manifestation of life has ceased. The whole body of
Christian truth has lost its symmetry and a part of its power to save.
</p>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 2:212&mdash;<q>In the Eleusinian mysteries, the act of reception
was represented as a regeneration, and the hierophant appointed to the temple service
had to take a sacramental bath, out of which he proceeded as a <q>new man</q> with a new
name, which signifies that, as they were wont to say, <q>the first one was forgotten,</q>&mdash;that
is, the old man was put off at the same time with the old name. The parallel of
this Eleusinian rite with the thoughts which Paul has written about Baptism in the
Epistle to the Romans, and therefore from Corinth, is so striking that a connection
between the two may well be conjectured; and all the more that even in the case of
the Lord's Supper, Paul has brought in the comparison with the heathen festivals, in
order to give a basis for his mystical theory.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) To substitute for baptism anything which excludes all symbolic
reference to the death of Christ, is to destroy the ordinance, just as substituting
for the broken bread and poured out wine of the communion some
form of administration which leaves out all reference to the death of Christ
would be to destroy the Lord's Supper, and to celebrate an ordinance of
human invention.
</p>

<pb n='945'/><anchor id='Pg945'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Baptism, like the Fourth of July, the Passover, the Lord's Supper, is a historical
monument. It witnesses to the world that Jesus died and rose again. In celebrating
it, we show forth the Lord's death as truly as in the celebration of the Supper. But it
is more than a historical monument. It is also a pictorial expression of doctrine. Into
it are woven all the essential truths of the Christian scheme. It tells of the nature and
penalty of sin, of human nature delivered from sin in the person of a crucified and
risen Savior, of salvation secured for each human soul that is united to Christ, of
obedience to Christ as the way to life and glory. Thus baptism stands from age to age
as a witness for God&mdash;a witness both to the facts and to the doctrine of Christianity.
To change the form of administering the ordinance is therefore to strike a blow at
Christianity and at Christ, and to defraud the world of a part of God's means of salvation.
See Ebrard's view of Baptism, in Baptist Quarterly, 1869:257, and in Olshausen's
Com. on N. T., 1:270, and 3:594. Also Lightfoot, Com. on <hi rend='italic'>Colossians 2:20</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>3:1</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Ebrard: <q>Baptism = Death.</q> So Sanday, Com. on <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6</hi>&mdash;<q>Immersion = Death; Submersion
= Burial (the ratification of death); Emergence = Resurrection (the ratification
of life).</q> William Ashmore: <q>Solomon's Temple had two monumental pillars: <hi rend='italic'>Jachin</hi>,
<q>he shall establish,</q> and <hi rend='italic'>Boaz</hi>, <q>in it is strength.</q> In Zechariah's vision were two olive
trees on either side of the golden candlestick. In like manner, Christ has left two
monumental witnesses to testify concerning himself&mdash;Baptism and the Lord's Supper.</q>
The lady in the street car, who had inadvertently stuck her parasol into a man's eye,
very naturally begged his pardon. But he replied: <q>It is of no consequence, madame;
I have still one eye left.</q> Our friends who sprinkle or pour put out one eye of the
gospel witness, break down one appointed monument of Christ's saving truth,&mdash;shall
we be content to say that we have still one ordinance left? At the Rappahannock one
of the Federal regiments, just because its standard was shot away, was mistaken by
our own men for a regiment of Confederates, and was subjected to a murderous enfilading
fire that decimated its ranks. Baptism and the Lord's Supper are the two flags
of Christ's army,&mdash;we cannot afford to lose either one of them.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. The Subjects of Baptism.</head>

<p>
The proper subjects of baptism are those only who give credible evidence
that they have been regenerated by the Holy Spirit,&mdash;or, in other words,
have entered by faith into the communion of Christ's death and resurrection.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. Proof that only persons giving evidence of being regenerated are
proper subjects of baptism.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From the command and example of Christ and his apostles, which
show:
</p>

<p>
First, that those only are to be baptized who have previously been made
disciples.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Go ye therefore, and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:41</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>They then that received his word were baptized.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Secondly, that those only are to be baptized who have previously
repented and believed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:2, 3, 6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Repent ye ... make ye ready the way of the Lord ... and they were baptized of him in the
river Jordan, confessing their sins</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:37, 38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart,
and said unto Peter and the rest of the apostles, Brethren, what shall we do? And Peter said unto them, Repent ye, and
be baptized every one of you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>8:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But when they believed Philip preaching good tidings concerning the kingdom
of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>18:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And Crispus, the ruler of
the synagogue, believed in the Lord with all his house; and many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptized</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>19:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>John baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe on him
that should come after him, that is, on Jesus.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From the nature of the church&mdash;as a company of regenerate persons.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 3:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Except one be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>neither
present your members unto sin as instruments of unrighteousness; but present yourselves unto God, as alive
from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='946'/><anchor id='Pg946'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) From the symbolism of the ordinance,&mdash;as declaring a previous
spiritual change in him who submits to it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 10:47</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Can any man forbid the water, that these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Spirit
as well as we?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:2-5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We who died to sin, how shall we any longer live therein? Or are ye ignorant that
all we who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? We were buried therefore with him through
baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also might walk
in newness of life. For if we have become united with him in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness
of his resurrection</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 3:26, 27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For ye are all sons of God, through faith, in Christ Jesus. For as many of you
as were baptized into Christ did put on Christ.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
As marriage should never be solemnized except between persons who are already
joined in heart and with whom the outward ceremony is only the sign of an existing
love, so baptism should never be administered except in the case of those who are
already joined to Christ and who signify in the ordinance their union with him in his
death and resurrection. See Dean Stanley on Baptism, 24&mdash;<q>In the apostolic age and
in the three centuries which followed, it is evident that, as a general rule, those who
came to baptism came in full age, of their own deliberate choice. The liturgical service
of baptism was framed for full-grown converts, and is only by considerable adaptation
applied to the case of infants</q>; Wayland, Principles and Practices of Baptists,
93; Robins, in Madison Avenue Lectures, 136-159.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. Inferences from the fact that only persons giving evidence of being
regenerate are proper subjects of baptism.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Since only those who give credible evidence of regeneration are
proper subjects of baptism, baptism cannot be the means of regeneration.
It is the appointed sign, but is never the condition, of the forgiveness of
sins.
</p>

<p>
Passages like Mat. 3:11; Mark 1:4; 16:16; John 3:5; Acts 2:38; 22:16;
Eph. 5:26; Titus 3:5; and Heb. 10:22, are to be explained as particular
instances <q>of the general fact that, in Scripture language, a single
part of a complex action, and even that part of it which is most obvious
to the senses, is often mentioned for the whole of it, and thus, in this case,
the whole of the solemn transaction is designated by the external symbol.</q>
In other words, the entire change, internal and external, spiritual and
ritual, is referred to in language belonging strictly only to the outward
aspect of it. So the other ordinance is referred to by simply naming the
visible <q>breaking of bread,</q> and the whole transaction of the ordination
of ministers is termed the <q>imposition of hands</q> (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Acts 2:42; 1 Tim.
4:14).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I indeed baptize you in water unto repentance</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mark 1:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the baptism of repentance unto remission
of sins</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>16:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 3:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Except one be born of water
and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God</hi></q>&mdash;here Nicodemus, who was familiar with
John's baptism, and with the refusal of the Sanhedrin to recognize its claims, is told
that the baptism of water, which he suspects may be obligatory, is indeed necessary to
that complete change by which one enters outwardly, as well as inwardly, into the
kingdom of God; but he is taught also, that to <q><hi rend='italic'>be born of water</hi></q> is worthless unless it is
the accompaniment and sign of a new birth of <q><hi rend='italic'>the Spirit</hi></q>; and therefore, in the further
statements of Christ, baptism is not alluded to; see <hi rend='italic'>verses 6, 8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that which is born of the Spirit
is spirit ... so is every one that is born of the Spirit.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Repent ye, and be baptized ... unto the remission of your sins</hi></q>&mdash;on this passage see
Hackett: <q>The phrase <q>in order to the forgiveness of sins</q> we connect naturally with
both the preceding verbs (<q><hi rend='italic'>repent</hi></q> and <q><hi rend='italic'>be baptized</hi></q>). The clause states the motive or
object which should induce them to repent and be baptized. It enforces the entire
exhortation, not one part to the exclusion of the other</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, they were to repent for
the remission of sins, quite as much as they were to be baptized for the remission of
sins. <hi rend='italic'>Acts 22:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on his name</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 5:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that he
might sanctify it</hi> [the church], <hi rend='italic'>having cleansed it by the washing of water with the word</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Tit. 3:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>according
<pb n='947'/><anchor id='Pg947'/>
to his mercy he saved as, through the washing of regeneration</hi> [baptism] <hi rend='italic'>and renewing of the Holy Spirit</hi>
[the new birth]</q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience</hi> [regeneration]: <hi rend='italic'>and
having our body washed with pure water</hi> [baptism]</q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:42</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the breaking of bread</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 4:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the
laying on of the hands of the presbytery.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. A. C. Kendrick: <q>Considering how inseparable they were in the Christian profession&mdash;believe
and be baptized, and how imperative and absolute was the requisition
upon the believer to testify his allegiance by baptism, it could not be deemed singular
that the two should be thus united, as it were, in one complex conception.... We
have no more right to assume that the birth from water involves the birth from the
Spirit and thus do away with the one, than to assume that the birth from the Spirit
involves the birth from water, and thus do away with the other. We have got to have
them both, each in its distinctness, in order to fulfil the conditions of membership in
the kingdom of God.</q> Without baptism, faith is like the works of a clock that has no
dial or hands by which one can tell the time; or like the political belief of a man who
refuses to go to the polls and vote. Without baptism, discipleship is ineffective and
incomplete. The inward change&mdash;regeneration by the Spirit&mdash;may have occurred, but
the outward change&mdash;Christian profession&mdash;is yet lacking.
</p>

<p>
Campbellism, however, holds that instead of regeneration preceding baptism and
expressing itself in baptism, it is completed only in baptism, so that baptism is a means
of regeneration. Alexander Campbell: <q>I am bold to affirm that every one of them,
who in the belief of what the apostle spoke was immersed, did, in the very instant in
which he was put under water, receive the forgiveness of his sins and the gift of the
Holy Spirit.</q> But Peter commanded that men should be baptized because they had
already received the Holy Spirit: <hi rend='italic'>Acts 10:47</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Can any man forbid the water, that these should not be
baptized, who have received the Holy Spirit as well as we?</hi></q> Baptists baptize Christians; Disciples
baptize sinners, and in baptism think to make them Christians. With this form of
sacramentalism, Baptists are necessarily less in sympathy than with pedobaptism or
with sprinkling. The view of the Disciples confines the divine efficiency to the word
(see quotation from Campbell on page <ref target='Pg821'>821</ref>). It was anticipated by Claude Pajon, the
Reformed theologian, in 1673: see Dorner, Gesch. prot. Theologie, 448-450. That this
was not the doctrine of John the Baptist would appear from Josephus, Ant., 18:5:2,
who in speaking of John's baptism says: <q>Baptism appears acceptable to God, not in
order that those who were baptized might get free from certain sins, but in order that
the body might be sanctified, because the soul beforehand had already been purified
through righteousness.</q>
</p>

<p>
Disciples acknowledge no formal creed, and they differ so greatly among themselves
that we append the following statements of their founder and of later representatives.
Alexander Campbell, Christianity Restored, 138 (in The Christian Baptist, 5:100): <q>In
and by the act of immersion, as soon as our bodies are put under water, at that very
instant our former or old sins are washed away.... Immersion and regeneration
are Bible names for the same act.... It is not our faith in God's promise of remission,
but our going down into the water, that obtains the remission of sins.</q> W. E.
Garrison, Alexander Campbell's Theology, 247-299&mdash;<q>Baptism, like naturalization, is
the formal oath of allegiance by which an alien becomes a citizen. In neither case
does the form in itself effect any magical change in the subject's disposition. In both
cases a change of opinion and of affections is presupposed, and the form is the culmination
of a process.... It is as easy for God to forgive our sins in the act of immersion
as in any other way.</q> All work of the Spirit is through the word, only through
sensible means, emotions being no criterion. God is transcendent; all authority is
external, enforced only by appeal to happiness&mdash;a thoroughly utilitarian system.
</p>

<p>
Isaac Erret is perhaps the most able of recent Disciples. In his tract entitled <q>Our
Position,</q> published by the Christian Publishing Company, St. Louis, he says: <q>As to
the <emph>design</emph> of baptism, we part company with Baptists, and find ourselves more at
home on the other side of the house; yet we cannot say that our position is just the
same with that of any of them. Baptists say they baptize believers <emph>because they are
forgiven</emph>, and they insist that they shall have the evidence of pardon before they are
baptized. But the language used in the Scriptures declaring what baptism is for, is so
plain and unequivocal that the great majority of Protestants as well as the Roman
Catholics admit it in their creeds to be, in some sense, for the remission of sins. The
latter, however, and many of the former, attach to it the idea of regeneration, and
insist that in baptism regeneration by the Holy Spirit is actually conferred. Even the
Westminster Confession squints strongly in this direction, albeit its professed adherents
of the present time attempt to explain away its meaning. We are as far from
<pb n='948'/><anchor id='Pg948'/>
this ritualistic extreme as from the anti-ritualism into which the Baptists have been
driven. With us, regeneration must be so far accomplished before baptism that the
subject is changed in heart, and in faith and penitence must have yielded up his heart
to Christ&mdash;otherwise baptism is nothing but an empty form. But <emph>forgiveness</emph> is something
distinct from <emph>regeneration</emph>. Forgiveness is an act of the Sovereign&mdash;not a change
of the sinner's heart; and while it is extended in view of the sinner's faith and repentance,
it needs to be offered in a sensible and tangible form, such that the sinner can
seize it and appropriate it with unmistakable definiteness. In baptism he <emph>appropriates
God's promise of forgiveness</emph>, relying on the divine testimonies: <q>He that believeth and
is baptized shall be saved</q>; <q>Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.</q>
He thus lays hold of the promise of Christ and appropriates it as his own. He does not
<emph>merit</emph> it, nor <emph>procure</emph> it, nor <emph>earn</emph> it, in being baptized; but he <emph>appropriates</emph> what the
mercy of God has provided and offered in the gospel. We therefore teach all who are
baptized that, if they bring to their baptism a heart that renounces sin and implicitly
trusts the power of Christ to save, they should rely on the Savior's own promise&mdash;'He
that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.'</q>
</p>

<p>
All these utterances agree in making forgiveness chronologically distinct from
regeneration, as the concluding point is distinct from the whole. Regeneration is not
entirely the work of God,&mdash;it must be completed by man. It is not wholly a change of
heart, it is also a change in outward action. We see in this system of thought the
beginnings of sacramentalism, and we regard it as containing the same germs of error
which are more fully developed in pedobaptist doctrine. Shakespeare represents this
view in Henry V, 1:2&mdash;<q>What you speak is in your conscience washed As pure as sin
with baptism</q>; Othello, 2:3&mdash;Desdemona could <q>Win the Moor&mdash;were't to renounce
his baptism&mdash;All seals and symbols of redeemed sin.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. G. W. Lasher, in the Journal and Messenger, holds that <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I indeed baptize
you in water unto (εἰς) repentance</hi></q>&mdash;does not imply that baptism effects the repentance; the
baptism was <emph>because</emph> of the repentance, for John refused to baptize those who did not
give evidence of repentance before baptism. <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 10:42</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whosoever shall give ... a cup of
cold water only, in (εἰς) the name of a disciple</hi></q>&mdash;the cup of cold water does not put one into the
name of a disciple, or make him a disciple. <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 12:41</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The men of Nineveh ... repented at
(εἰς) the preaching of Jonah</hi></q> = because of. Dr. Lasher argues that, in all these cases, the meaning
of εἰς is <q>in respect to,</q> <q>with reference to.</q> So he would translate <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Repent
ye, and be baptized ... with respect to, in reference to, the remission of sins.</hi></q> This is also the view
of Meyer. He maintains that βαπτίζειν εἰς always means <q><hi rend='italic'>baptize with reference to</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mat.
28:19; 1 Cor. 10:12; Gal. 3:27; Acts 2:38; 8:16; 19:5</hi>). We are brought through baptism, he
would say, into fellowship with his death, so that we have a share ethically in his
death, through the cessation of our life to sin.
</p>

<p>
The better parallel, however, in our judgment, is found in <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 10:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>with the heart
man believeth unto (εἰς) righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto (εἰς) salvation,</hi></q>&mdash;where
evidently salvation is the end <emph>to</emph> which works the whole change and process, including
both faith and confession. So Broadus makes John's <q><hi rend='italic'>baptism unto repentance</hi></q> mean baptism
in order to repentance, repentance including both the purpose of the heart and the
outward expression of it, or baptism in order to complete and thorough repentance.
Expositor's Greek Testament, on <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>unto the remission of your sins</hi></q>: <q>εἰς, <hi rend='italic'>unto</hi>, signifying
the aim.</q> For the High Church view, see Sadler, Church Doctrine, 41-124. On
F. W. Robertson's view of Baptismal Regeneration, see Gordon, in Bap. Quar., 1869:405.
On the whole matter of baptism for the remission of sins, see Gates, Baptists and Disciples
(advocating the Disciple view); Willmarth, in Bap. Quar., 1877:1-26 (verging
toward the Disciple view); and <hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>, Adkins, Disciples and Baptists, booklet pub.
by Am. Bap. Pub. Society (the best brief statement of the Baptist position); Bap.
Quar., 1877:476-489; 1872:214; Jacob, Eccl. Pol. of N. T., 255, 256.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) As the profession of a spiritual change already wrought, baptism is
primarily the act, not of the administrator, but of the person baptized.
</p>

<p>
Upon the person newly regenerate the command of Christ first terminates;
only upon his giving evidence of the change within him does it
become the duty of the church to see that he has opportunity to follow
Christ in baptism. Since baptism is primarily the act of the convert, no
lack of qualification on the part of the administrator invalidates the baptism,
<pb n='949'/><anchor id='Pg949'/>
so long as the proper outward act is performed, with intent on the
part of the person baptized to express the fact of a preceding spiritual
renewal (Acts 2:37, 38).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:37, 38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Brethren, what shall we do?... Repent ye and be baptized.</hi></q> If baptism be primarily
the act of the administrator or of the church, then invalidity in the administrator or
the church renders the ordinance itself invalid. But if baptism be primarily the act of
the person baptized&mdash;an act which it is the church's business simply to scrutinize and
further, then nothing but the absence of immersion, or of an intent to profess faith in
Christ, can invalidate the ordinance. It is the erroneous view that baptism is the act of
the administrator which causes the anxiety of High Church Baptists to deduce their
Baptist lineage from regularly baptized ministers all the way back to John the Baptist,
and which induces many modern endeavors of pedobaptists to prove that the earliest
Baptists of England and the Continent did not immerse. All these solicitudes are
unnecessary. We have no need to prove a Baptist apostolic succession. If we can
derive our doctrine and practice from the New Testament, it is all we require.
</p>

<p>
The Council of Trent was right in its Canon: <q>If any one saith that the baptism
which is even given by heretics in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost, with the intention of doing what the church doeth, is not true baptism,
let him be anathema.</q> Dr. Norman Fox: <q>It is no more important who baptizes a
man than who leads him to Christ.</q> John Spilsbury, first pastor of the church of Particular
Baptists, holding to a limited atonement, in London, was newly baptized in 1633,
on the ground that <q>baptizedness is not essential to the administrator,</q> and he repudiated
the demand for apostolic succession, as leading logically to the <q>popedom of
Rome.</q> In 1641, immersion followed, though two or three years before this, or in
March, 1639, Roger Williams was baptized by Ezekiel Holliman in Rhode Island.
Williams afterwards doubted its validity, thus clinging still to the notion of apostolic
succession.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) As intrusted with the administration of the ordinances, however, the
church is, on its part, to require of all candidates for baptism credible evidence
of regeneration.
</p>

<p>
This follows from the nature of the church and its duty to maintain its
own existence as an institution of Christ. The church which cannot restrict
admission into its membership to such as are like itself in character and
aims must soon cease to be a church by becoming indistinguishable from
the world. The duty of the church to gain credible evidence of regeneration
in the case of every person admitted into the body involves its right to
require of candidates, in addition to a profession of faith with the lips,
some satisfactory proof that this profession is accompanied by change in
the conduct. The kind and amount of evidence which would have justified
the reception of a candidate in times of persecution may not now constitute
a sufficient proof of change of heart.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
If an Odd Fellows' Lodge, in order to preserve its distinct existence, must have its
own rules for admission to membership, much more is this true of the church. The
church may make its own regulations with a view to secure credible evidence of regeneration.
Yet it is bound to demand of the candidate no more than reasonable proof of
his repentance and faith. Since the church is to be convinced of the candidate's fitness
before it votes to receive him to its membership, it is generally best that the experience
of the candidate should be related before the church. Yet in extreme cases, as of
sickness, the church may hear this relation of experience through certain appointed
representatives.
</p>

<p>
Baptism is sometimes figuratively described as <q>the door into the church.</q> The
phrase is unfortunate, since if by the church is meant the spiritual kingdom of God,
then Christ is its only door; if the local body of believers is meant, then the faith of the
candidate, the credible evidence of regeneration which he gives, the vote of the church
itself, are all, equally with baptism, the door through which he enters. The door, in
this sense, is a double door, one part of which is his confession of faith, and the other
his baptism.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='950'/><anchor id='Pg950'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) As the outward expression of the inward change by which the
believer enters into the kingdom of God, baptism is the first, in point of
time, of all outward duties.
</p>

<p>
Regeneration and baptism, although not holding to each other the relation
of effect and cause, are both regarded in the New Testament as essential
to the restoration of man's right relations to God and to his people.
They properly constitute parts of one whole, and are not to be unnecessarily
separated. Baptism should follow regeneration with the least possible
delay, after the candidate and the church have gained evidence that a
spiritual change has been accomplished within him. No other duty and no
other ordinance can properly precede it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Neither the pastor nor the church should encourage the convert to wait for others'
company before being baptized. We should aim continually to deepen the sense of
individual responsibility to Christ, and of personal duty to obey his command of baptism
just so soon as a proper opportunity is afforded. That participation in the Lord's
Supper cannot properly precede Baptism, will be shown hereafter.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) Since regeneration is a work accomplished once for all, the baptism
which symbolizes this regeneration is not to be repeated.
</p>

<p>
Even where the persuasion exists, on the part of the candidate, that at
the time of baptism he was mistaken in thinking himself regenerated, the
ordinance is not to be administered again, so long as it has once been submitted
to, with honest intent, as a profession of faith in Christ. We argue
this from the absence of any reference to second baptisms in the New Testament,
and from the grave practical difficulties attending the opposite
view. In Acts 19:1-5, we have an instance, not of rebaptism, but of the
baptism for the first time of certain persons who had been wrongly taught
with regard to the nature of John the Baptist's doctrine, and so had ignorantly
submitted to an outward rite which had in it no reference to Jesus
Christ and expressed no faith in him as a Savior. This was not John's
baptism, nor was it in any sense true baptism. For this reason Paul commanded
them to be <q>baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In the respect of not being repeated, Baptism is unlike the Lord's Supper, which
symbolizes the continuous sustaining power of Christ's death, while baptism symbolizes
its power to begin a new life within the soul. In <hi rend='italic'>Acts 19:1-5</hi>, Paul instructs the new
disciples that the real baptism of John, to which they erroneously supposed they had
submitted, was not only a baptism of repentance, but a baptism of faith in the coming
Savior. <q><hi rend='italic'>And when they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus</hi></q>&mdash;as they had not
been before. Here there was no rebaptism, for the mere outward submersion in water
to which they had previously submitted, with no thought of professing faith in Christ,
was no baptism at all&mdash;whether Johannine or Christian. See Brooks, in Baptist Quarterly,
April, 1867, art.: Rebaptism.
</p>

<p>
Whenever it is clear, as in many cases of Campbellite immersion, that the candidate
has gone down into the water, not with intent to profess a previously existing faith,
but in order to be regenerated, baptism is still to be administered if the person subsequently
believes on Christ. But wherever it appears that there was intent to profess
an already existing faith and regeneration, there should be no repetition of the immersion,
even though the ordinance has been administered by the Campbellites.
</p>

<p>
To rebaptize whenever a Christian's faith and joy are rekindled so that he begins to
doubt the reality of his early experiences, would, in the case of many fickle believers,
require many repetitions of the ordinance. The presumption is that, when the profession
of faith was made by baptism, there was an actual faith which needed to be professed,
and therefore that the baptism, though followed by much unbelief and many
wanderings, was a valid one. Rebaptism, in the case of unstable Christians, tends to
bring reproach upon the ordinance itself.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='951'/><anchor id='Pg951'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) So long as the mode and the subjects are such as Christ has enjoined,
mere accessories are matters of individual judgment.
</p>

<p>
The use of natural rather than of artificial baptisteries is not to be elevated
into an essential. The formula of baptism prescribed by Christ is <q>into
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>baptizing them into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 8:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they
had been baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Or are ye ignorant that all we who were
baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Gal. 3:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For as many of you as were baptized into
Christ did put on Christ.</hi></q> Baptism is immersion into God, into the presence, communion, life
of the Trinity; see Com. of Clark, and of Lange, on <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19</hi>; also C. E. Smith, in Bap.
Rev., 1881:305-311. President Wayland and the Revised Version read, <q><hi rend='italic'>into the name</hi>.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Meyer (transl., 1:281, note) on <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:3;</hi> <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 10:41; 18:20</hi>; in all which
passages, as well as in <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19</hi>, he claims that εἰς τὸ ὄνομα signifies <q>with reference to the
name.</q> In <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:38</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>10:48</hi>, we have <q><hi rend='italic'>in the name</hi>.</q> For the latter translation of <hi rend='italic'>Mat.
28:19</hi>, see Conant, Notes on Mat., 171. On the whole subject of this section, see Dagg,
Church Order, 13-73; Ingham, Subjects of Baptism.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>C. Infant Baptism.</head>

<p>
This we reject and reprehend, for the following reasons:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(a) Infant baptism is without warrant, either express or implied, in the
Scripture.</head>

<p>
First,&mdash;there is no express command that infants should be baptized.
Secondly,&mdash;there is no clear example of the baptism of infants. Thirdly,&mdash;the
passages held to imply infant baptism contain, when fairly interpreted,
no reference to such a practice. In Mat. 19:14, none would have <q>forbidden,</q>
if Jesus and his disciples had been in the habit of baptizing infants.
From Acts 16:15, <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 40, and Acts 16:33, <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 34, Neander says that we
cannot infer infant baptism. For 1 Cor. 16:15 shows that the whole
family of Stephanas, baptized by Paul, were adults (1 Cor. 1:16). It is
impossible to suppose a whole heathen household baptized upon the faith
of its head. As to 1 Cor. 7:14, Jacobi calls this text <q>a sure testimony
against infant baptism, since Paul would certainly have referred to the
baptism of children as a proof of their holiness, if infant baptism had been
practised.</q> Moreover, this passage would in that case equally teach the
baptism of the unconverted husband of a believing wife. It plainly proves
that the children of Christian parents were no more baptized and had no
closer connection with the Christian church, than the unbelieving partners
of Christians.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 19:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Suffer the little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for to such belongeth the kingdom of
heaven</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 16:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And when she</hi> [Lydia] <hi rend='italic'>was baptized, and her household</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>40</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And they went out
of the prison, and entered into the house of Lydia: and when they had seen the brethren, they comforted them, and
departed.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 16:33</hi>&mdash;The jailor <q><hi rend='italic'>was baptized, he and all his, immediately</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>34</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And he brought
them up into his house, and set food before them, and rejoiced greatly, with all his house, having believed in God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1
Cor. 16:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the firstfruits of Achaia, and that they have set themselves
to minister unto the saints</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I baptized also the household of Stephanas</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>7:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the unbelieving
husband is sanctified in the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in the brother: else were your children unclean;
but now are they holy</hi></q>&mdash;here the sanctity or holiness attributed to unbelieving members of
the household is evidently that of external connection and privilege, like that of the
O. T. Israel.
</p>

<p>
Broadus, Am. Com., on <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 19:14</hi>&mdash;<q>No Greek Commentator mentions infant baptism
in connection with this passage, though they all practised that rite.</q> Schleiermacher,
Glaubenslehre, 2:383&mdash;<q>All the traces of infant baptism which it has been desired to
find in the New Testament must first be put into it.</q> Pfleiderer, Grundriss, 184-187&mdash;<q>Infant
<pb n='952'/><anchor id='Pg952'/>
baptism cannot be proved from the N. T., and according to <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 7:14</hi> it is antecedently
improbable; yet it was the logical consequence of the command, <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19</hi> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
in which the church consciousness of the 2d century prophetically expressed Christ's
appointment that it should be the universal church of the nations.... Infant baptism
represents one side of the Biblical sacrament, the side of the divine grace; but it
needs to have the other side, appropriation of that grace by personal freedom, added
in confirmation.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. A. S. Crapsey, formerly an Episcopal rector in Rochester, made the following
statement in the introduction to a sermon in defence of infant baptism: <q>Now in
support of this custom of the church, we can bring no express command of the word
of God, no certain warrant of holy Scripture, nor can we be at all sure that this
usage prevailed during the apostolic age. From a few obscure hints we may conjecture
that it did, but it is only conjecture after all. It is true St. Paul baptized the
household of Stephanas, of Lydia, and of the jailor at Philippi, and in these households
there may have been little children; but we do not know that there were, and these
inferences form but a poor foundation upon which to base any doctrine. Better say
at once, and boldly, that infant baptism is not expressly taught in holy Scripture. Not
only is the word of God silent on this subject, but those who have studied the subject
tell us that Christian writers of the very first age say nothing about it. It is by no
means sure that this custom obtained in the church earlier than in the middle of the
second or the beginning of the third century.</q> Dr. C. M. Mead, in a private letter,
dated May 27, 1895&mdash;<q>Though a Congregationalist, I cannot find any Scriptural authorization
of pedobaptism, and I admit also that immersion seems to have been the prevalent,
if not the universal, form of baptism at the first.</q>
</p>

<p>
A review of the passages held by pedobaptists to support their views leads us to the
conclusion expressed in the North British Review, Aug. 1852:211, that infant baptism
is utterly unknown to Scripture. Jacob, Eccl. Polity of N. T., 270-275&mdash;<q>Infant baptism
is not mentioned in the N. T. No instance of it is recorded there; no allusion is
made to its effects; no directions are given for its administration.... It is not an
apostolic ordinance.</q> See also Neander's view, in Kitto, Bib. Cyclop., art.: Baptism;
Kendrick, in Christian Rev., April, 1863; Curtis, Progress of Baptist Principles, 96;
Wayland, Principles and Practices of Baptists, 125; Cunningham, lect. on Baptism, in
Croall Lectures for 1886.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(b) Infant baptism is expressly contradicted.</head>

<p>
First,&mdash;by the Scriptural prerequisites of faith and repentance, as signs
of regeneration. In the great commission, Matthew speaks of baptizing
disciples, and Mark of baptizing believers; but infants are neither of these.
Secondly,&mdash;by the Scriptural symbolism of the ordinance. As we should
not bury a person before his death, so we should not symbolically bury a
person by baptism until he has in spirit died to sin. Thirdly,&mdash;by the
Scriptural constitution of the church. The church is a company of persons
whose union with one another presupposes and expresses a previous conscious
and voluntary union of each with Jesus Christ. But of this conscious
and voluntary union with Christ infants are not capable. Fourthly,&mdash;by
the Scriptural prerequisites for participation in the Lord's Supper. Participation
in the Lord's Supper is the right only of those who can discern
the Lord's body (1 Cor. 11:29). No reason can be assigned for restricting
to intelligent communicants the ordinance of the Supper, which would
not equally restrict to intelligent believers the ordinance of Baptism.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Infant baptism has accordingly led in the Greek church to infant communion. This
course seems logically consistent. If baptism is administered to unconscious babes,
they should participate in the Lord's Supper also. But if confirmation or any intelligent
profession of faith is thought necessary before communion, why should not such
confirmation or profession be thought necessary before baptism? On Jonathan
Edwards and the Halfway Covenant, see New Englander, Sept. 1884:601-614; G. L.
Walker, Aspects of Religious Life of New England, 61-82; Dexter, Congregationalism,
487, note&mdash;<q>It has been often intimated that President Edwards opposed and destroyed
<pb n='953'/><anchor id='Pg953'/>
the Halfway Covenant. He did oppose Stoddardism, or the doctrine that the Lord's
Supper is a converting ordinance, and that unconverted men, because they are such,
should be encouraged to partake of it.</q> The tendency of his system was adverse to it;
but, for all that appears in his published writings, he could have approved and administered
that form of the Halfway Covenant then current among the churches. John
Fiske says of Jonathan Edwards's preaching: <q>The prominence he gave to spiritual
conversion, or what was called <q>change of heart,</q> brought about the overthrow of the
doctrine of the Halfway Covenant. It also weakened the logical basis of infant baptism,
and led to the winning of hosts of converts by the Baptists.</q>
</p>

<p>
Other pedobaptist bodies than the Greek Church save part of the truth, at the expense
of consistency, by denying participation in the Lord's Supper to those baptized in infancy
until they have reached years of understanding and have made a public profession of
faith. Dr. Charles E. Jefferson, at the International Congregational Council of Boston,
September, 1899, urged that the children of believers are already church members, and
that as such they are entitled, not only to baptism, but also to the Lord's Supper&mdash;<q>an
assertion that started much thought</q>! Baptists may well commend Congregationalists
to the teaching of their own Increase Mather, The Order of the Gospel (1700), 11&mdash;<q>The
Congregational Church discipline is not suited for a worldly interest or for a
formal generation of professors. It will stand or fall as godliness in the power of it
does prevail, or otherwise.... If the begun Apostacy should proceed as fast the
next thirty years as it has done these last, surely it will come that in New England
(except the gospel itself depart with the order of it) that the most conscientious
people therein will think themselves concerned <hi rend='italic'>to gather churches out of churches</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
How much of Judaistic externalism may linger among nominal Christians is shown
by the fact that in the Armenian Church animal sacrifices survived, or were permitted
to converted heathen priests, in order they might not lose their livelihood. These
sacrifices continued in other regions of Christendom, particularly in the Greek church,
and Pope Gregory the Great permitted them; see Conybeare, in Am. Jour. Theology,
Jan. 1893:62-90. In The Key of Truth, a manual of the Paulician Church of Armenia,
whose date in its present form is between the seventh and the ninth centuries, we have
the Adoptianist view of Christ's person, and of the subjects and the mode of baptism:
<q>Thus also the Lord, having learned from the Father, proceeded to teach us to perform
baptism and all other commandments at the age of full growth and at no other
time.... For some have broken and destroyed the holy and precious canons which
by the Father Almighty were delivered to our Lord Jesus Christ, and have trodden
them underfoot with their devilish teaching, ... baptizing those who are irrational,
and communicating the unbelieving.</q>
</p>

<p>
Minority is legally divided into three septennates: 1. From the first to the seventh
year, the age of complete irresponsibility, in which the child cannot commit a crime; 2.
from the seventh to the fourteenth year, the age of partial responsibility, in which
intelligent consciousness of the consequences of actions is not assumed to exist, but
may be proved in individual instances; 3. from the fourteenth to the twenty-first year,
the age of discretion, in which the person is responsible for criminal action, may choose
a guardian, make a will, marry with consent of parents, make business contracts not
wholly void, but is not yet permitted fully to assume the free man's position in the
State. The church however is not bound by these hard and fast rules. Wherever it
has evidence of conversion and of Christian character, it may admit to baptism and
church membership, even at a very tender age.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(c) The rise of infant baptism in the history of the church.</head>

<p>
The rise of infant baptism in the history of the church is due to
sacramental conceptions of Christianity, so that all arguments in its favor
from the writings of the first three centuries are equally arguments for
baptismal regeneration.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Neander's view may be found in Kitto, Cyclopædia, 1:287&mdash;<q>Infant baptism was
established neither by Christ nor by his apostles. Even in later times Tertullian
opposed it, the North African church holding to the old practice.</q> The newly discovered
Teaching of the Apostles, which Bryennios puts at 140-160 A.D., and Lightfoot
at 80-110 A. D., seems to know nothing of infant baptism.
</p>

<p>
Professor A. H. Newman, in Bap. Rev., Jan. 1884&mdash;<q rend='pre'>Infant baptism has always gone
hand in hand with State churches. It is difficult to conceive how an ecclesiastical
establishment could be maintained without infant baptism or its equivalent. We
should think, if the facts did not show us so plainly the contrary, that the doctrine of
<pb n='954'/><anchor id='Pg954'/>
justification by faith alone would displace infant baptism. But no. The <emph>establishment</emph>
must be maintained. The rejection of infant baptism implies insistence upon a baptism
of believers. Only the baptized are properly members of the church. Even adults
would not all receive baptism on professed faith, unless they were actually compelled
to do so. Infant baptism must therefore be retained as the necessary concomitant of
a State church.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But what becomes of the justification by faith? Baptism, if it symbolizes anything,
symbolizes regeneration. It would be ridiculous to make the symbol to forerun the
fact by a series of years. Luther saw the difficulty; but he was sufficient for the
emergency. <q>Yes,</q> said he, <q>justification is by faith alone. No outward rite, apart
from faith, has any efficacy.</q> Why, it was against <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opera operata</foreign> that he was laying out
all his strength. Yet baptism is the symbol of regeneration, and baptism must be
administered to infants, or the State church falls. With an audacity truly sublime,
the great reformer declares that infants are regenerated in connection with baptism,
and that they are <emph>simultaneously justified by personal faith</emph>. An infant eight days old
believe? <q>Prove the contrary if you can!</q> triumphantly ejaculates Luther, and his
point is gained. If this kind of personal faith is said to justify infants, is it wonderful
that those of maturer years learned to take a somewhat superficial view of the faith
that justifies?</q>
</p>

<p>
Yet Luther had written: <q>Whatever is without the word of God is by that very fact
against God</q>; see his Briefe, ed. DeWette, II:292; J. G. Walch, De Fide in Utero.
There was great discordance between Luther as reformer, and Luther as conservative
churchman. His Catholicism, only half overcome, broke into all his views of faith.
In his early years, he stood for reason and Scripture; in his later years he fought reason
and Scripture in the supposed interest of the church.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 18:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>See that ye despise not one of these little ones</hi></q>&mdash;which refers not to little children but
to childlike believers, Luther adduces as a proof of infant baptism, holding that the
child is said to believe&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>little ones that believe on me</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>verse 6</hi>)&mdash;because it has been circumcised
and received into the number of the elect. <q>And so, through baptism, children
become believers. How else could the children of Turks and Jews be distinguished
from those of Christians?</q> Does this involve the notion that infants dying unbaptized
are lost? To find the very apostle of justification by faith saying that a little child
becomes a <emph>believer</emph> by being baptized, is humiliating and disheartening (so Broadus.
Com. on Matthew, page 384, note).
</p>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 2:342-345, quotes from Lang as follows: <q>By mistaking
and casting down the Protestant spirit which put forth its demands on the time in
Carlstadt, Zwingle, and others, Luther made Protestantism lose its salt; he inflicted
wounds upon it from which it has not yet recovered to-day; and the ecclesiastical
struggle of the present is just a struggle of spiritual freedom against Lutherism.</q>
E. G. Robinson: <q>Infant baptism is a rag of Romanism. Since regeneration is always
through the truth, baptismal regeneration is an absurdity.</q> See Christian Review,
Jan. 1851; Neander, Church History, 1:311, 313; Coleman, Christian Antiquities, 258-260;
Arnold, in Bap. Quarterly, 1869:32; Hovey, in Bap. Quarterly, 1871:75.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(d) The reasoning by which it is supported is unscriptural, unsound,
and dangerous in its tendency.</head>

<p>
First,&mdash;in assuming the power of the church to modify or abrogate a
command of Christ. This has been sufficiently answered above. Secondly,&mdash;in
maintaining that infant baptism takes the place of circumcision under
the Abrahamic covenant. To this we reply that the view contradicts the
New Testament idea of the church, by making it a hereditary body, in
which fleshly birth, and not the new birth, qualifies for membership. <q>As
the national Israel typified the spiritual Israel, so the circumcision which
immediately followed, not preceded, natural birth, bids us baptize children,
not before, but after spiritual birth.</q> Thirdly,&mdash;in declaring that baptism
belongs to the infant because of an organic connection of the child with
the parent, which permits the latter to stand for the former and to make
profession of faith for it,&mdash;faith already existing germinally in the child by
virtue of this organic union, and certain for the same reason to be developed
<pb n='955'/><anchor id='Pg955'/>
as the child grows to maturity. <q>A law of organic connection as regards
character subsisting between the parent and the child,&mdash;such a connection
as induces the conviction that the character of the one is actually included
in the character of the other, as the seed is formed in the capsule.</q> We
object to this view that it unwarrantably confounds the personality of the
child with that of the parent; practically ignores the necessity of the Holy
Spirit's regenerating influences in the case of children of Christian parents;
and presumes in such children a gracious state which facts conclusively
show not to exist.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
What takes the place of circumcision is not baptism but regeneration. Paul defeated
the attempt to fasten circumcision on the church, when he refused to have that rite
performed on Titus. But later Judaizers succeeded in perpetuating circumcision under
the form of infant baptism, and afterward of infant sprinkling (McGarvey, Com. on
Acts). E. G. Robinson: <q>Circumcision is not a type of baptism: 1. It is purely a gratuitous
assumption that it is so. There is not a word in Scripture to authorize it;
2. Circumcision was a national, a theocratic, and not a personal, religious rite; 3. If
circumcision be a type, why did Paul circumcise Timothy? Why did he not explain, on
an occasion so naturally calling for it, that circumcision was replaced by baptism?</q>
</p>

<p>
On the theory that baptism takes the place of circumcision, see Pepper, Baptist
Quarterly, April, 1857; Palmer, in Baptist Quarterly, 1871:314. The Christian Church is
either a natural, <emph>hereditary</emph> body, or it was merely <emph>typified</emph> by the Jewish people. In
the former case, baptism belongs to all children of Christian parents, and the church is
indistinguishable from the world. In the latter case, it belongs only to spiritual
descendants, and therefore only to true believers. <q>That Jewish Christians, who of
course had been circumcised, were also baptized, and that a large number of them
insisted that Gentiles who had been baptized should also be circumcised, shows conclusively
that baptism did not take the place of circumcision.... The notion that
the family is the unit of society is a relic of barbarism. This appears in the Roman law,
which was good for property but not for persons. It left none but a servile station to
wife or son, thus degrading society at the fountain of family life. To gain freedom,
the Roman wife had to accept a form of marriage which opened the way for unlimited
liberty of divorce.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hereditary church-membership is of the same piece with hereditary priesthood, and
both are relics of Judaism. J. J. Murphy, Nat. Selection and Spir. Freedom, 81&mdash;<q>The
institution of hereditary priesthood, which was so deeply rooted in the religions of
antiquity and was adopted into Judaism, has found no place in Christianity; there is
not, I believe, any church whatever calling itself by the name of Christ, in which the
ministry is hereditary.</q> Yet there is a growing disposition to find in infant baptism
the guarantee of hereditary church membership. Washington Gladden, What is Left?
252-254&mdash;<q>Solidarity of the generations finds expression in infant baptism. Families
ought to be Christian and not individuals only. In the Society of Friends every one
born of parents belonging to the Society is a birthright member. Children of Christian
parents are heirs of the kingdom. The State recognizes that our children are organically
connected with it. When parents are members of the State, children are not
aliens. They are not called to perform duties of citizenship until a certain age, but the
rights and privileges of citizenship are theirs from the moment of their birth. The
State is the mother of her children; shall the church be less motherly than the State?...
Baptism does not make the child God's child; it simply recognizes and declares
the fact.</q>
</p>

<p>
Another illustration of what we regard as a radically false view is found in the sermon
of Bishop Grafton of Fond du Lac, at the consecration of Bishop Nicholson in
Philadelphia: <q>Baptism is not like a function in the natural order, like the coronation
of a king, an acknowledgment of what the child already is. The child, truly God's
loved offspring by way of creation, is in baptism translated into the new creation and
incorporated into the Incarnate One, and made his child.</q> Yet, as the great majority
of the inmates of our prisons and the denizens of the slums have received this <q>baptism,</q>
it appears that this <q>loved offspring</q> very early lost its <q>new creation</q> and got
<q>translated</q> in the wrong direction. We regard infant baptism as only an ancient
example of the effort to bring in the kingdom of God by externals, the protest against
<pb n='956'/><anchor id='Pg956'/>
which brought Jesus to the cross. Our modern methods of salvation by sociology and
education and legislation are under the same indictment, as crucifying the Son of God
afresh and putting him to open shame.
</p>

<p>
Prof. Moses Stuart urged that the form of baptism was immaterial, but that the
temper of heart was the thing of moment. Francis Wayland, then a student of his,
asked: <q>If such is the case, with what propriety can baptism be administered to those
who cannot be supposed to exercise any temper of heart at all, and with whom the
form must be everything?</q>&mdash;The third theory of organic connection of the child with
its parents is elaborated by Bushnell, in his Christian Nurture, 90-223. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see
Bunsen, Hippolytus and his Times, 179, 211; Curtis, Progress of Baptist Principles, 262.
Hezekiah's son Manasseh was not godly; and it would be rash to say that all the
drunkard's children are presumptively drunkards.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(e) The lack of agreement among pedobaptists.</head>

<p>
The lack of agreement among pedobaptists as to the warrant for
infant baptism and as to the relation of baptized infants to the church,
together with the manifest decline of the practice itself, are arguments
against it.
</p>

<p>
The propriety of infant baptism is variously argued, says Dr. Bushnell,
upon the ground of <q>natural innocence, inherited depravity, and federal
holiness; because of the infant's own character, the parent's piety, and the
church's faith; for the reason that the child is an heir of salvation already,
and in order to make it such.... No settled opinion on infant baptism
and on Christian nurture has ever been attained to.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Quot homines, tot sententiæ. The belated traveler in a thunderstorm prayed for a
little more light and less noise. Bushnell, Christian Nurture, 9-89, denies original sin,
denies that hereditary connection can make a child guilty. But he seems to teach
transmitted righteousness, or that hereditary connection can make a child holy. He disparages
<q>sensible experiences</q> and calls them <q>explosive conversions.</q> But because
we do not know the time of conversion, shall we say that there never was a time when
the child experienced God's grace? See Bib. Sac., 1872:665. Bushnell said: <q>I don't
know what right we have to say that a child can't be born again before he is born the
first time.</q> Did not John the Baptist preach Christ before he was born? (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 1:15, 41, 44</hi>).
The answer to Bushnell is simply this, that regeneration is through the truth, and an
unborn child cannot know the truth. To disjoin regeneration from the truth, is to
make it a matter of external manipulation in which the soul is merely passive and the
whole process irrational. There is a secret work of God in the soul, but it is always
accompanied by an awakening of the soul to perceive the truth and to accept Christ.
</p>

<p>
Are baptized infants members of the Presbyterian Church? We answer by citing
the following standards: 1. The Confession of Faith, 25:2&mdash;<q>The visible church ...
consists of all those throughout the world, that profess the true religion, together with
their children.</q> 2. The Larger Catechism, 62&mdash;<q>The visible church is a society made
up of all such as in all ages and places of the world do profess the true religion, and of
their children.</q> 166&mdash;<q>Baptism is not to be administered to any that are not of the
visible church ... till they profess their faith in Christ and obedience to him: but
infants descending from parents either both or but one of them professing faith in
Christ and obedience to him are in that respect within the covenant and are to be baptized.</q>
3. The Shorter Catechism, 96&mdash;<q>Baptism is not to be administered to any that
are out of the visible church, till they profess their faith in Christ and obedience to him:
but the infants of such as are members of the visible church are to be baptized.</q>
4. Form of Government, 3&mdash;<q>A particular church consists of a number of professing
Christians, with their offspring.</q> 5. Directory for Worship, 1&mdash;<q>Children born within
the pale of the visible church and dedicated to God in baptism are under the inspection
and government of the church.... When they come to years of discretion, if they
be free from scandal, appear sober and steady, and to have sufficient knowledge to
discern the Lord's body, they ought to be informed it is their duty and their privilege
to come to the Lord's Supper.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Maplewood Congregational Church of Malden, Mass., enrolls as members all
children baptized by the church. The relation continues until they indicate a desire
either to continue it or to dissolve it. The list of such members is kept distinct from
that of the adults, but they are considered as members under the care of the church.
<pb n='957'/><anchor id='Pg957'/>
Dr. W. G. T. Shedd: <q>The infant of a believer is born into the church as the infant of a
citizen is born into the State. A baptized child in adult years may renounce his baptism,
become an infidel, and join the synagogue of Satan, but until he does this, he
must be regarded as a member of the church of Christ.</q>
</p>

<p>
On the Decline of Infant Baptism, see Vedder, in Baptist Review, April, 1882:173-189,
who shows that in fifty years past the proportion of infant baptisms to communicants
in general has decreased from one in seven to one in eleven; among the Reformed,
from one in twelve to one in twenty; among the Presbyterians, from one in fifteen to
one in thirty-three; among the Methodists, from one in twenty-two to one in twenty-nine;
among the Congregationalists, from one in fifty to one in seventy-seven.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(f) The evil effects of infant baptism.</head>

<p>
First,&mdash;in forestalling the voluntary act of the child baptized, and thus
practically preventing his personal obedience to Christ's commands.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The person baptized in infancy has never performed any act with intent to obey
Christ's command to be baptized, never has put forth a single volition looking toward
obedience to that command; see Wilkinson, The Baptist Principle, 40-46. Every man
has the right to choose his own wife. So every man has the right to choose his own
Savior.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Secondly,&mdash;in inducing superstitious confidence in an outward rite as
possessed of regenerating efficacy.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
French parents still regard infants before baptism as only animals (Stanley). The
haste with which the minister is summoned to baptize the dying child shows that superstition
still lingers in many an otherwise evangelical family in our own country. The
English Prayerbook declares that in baptism the infant is <q>made a child of God and
an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven.</q> Even the Westminster Assembly's Catechism,
28:6, holds that grace is actually conferred in baptism, though the efficacy of it is
delayed till riper years. Mercersburg Review: <q>The objective medium or instrumental
cause of regeneration is baptism. Men are not regenerated outside the church and
then brought into it for preservation, but they are regenerated by being incorporated
with or engrafted into the church through the sacrament of baptism.</q> Catholic
Review: <q>Unbaptized, these little ones go into darkness; but baptized, they rejoice in
the presence of God forever.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. Beebe of Hamilton went after a minister to baptize his sick child, but before he
returned the child died. Reflection made him a Baptist, and the Editor of The
Examiner. Baptists unhesitatingly permit converts to die unbaptized, showing plainly
that they do not regard baptism as essential to salvation. Baptism no more makes
one a Christian, than putting a crown on one's head makes him a king. Zwingle held
to a symbolic interpretation of the Lord's Supper, but he clung to the sacramental
conception of Baptism. E. H. Johnson, Uses and Abuses of Ordinances, 33, claims
that, while baptism is not a justifying or regenerating ordinance, it is a sanctifying
ordinance,&mdash;sanctifying, in the sense of setting apart. Yes, we reply, but only as
church going and prayer are sanctifying; the efficacy is not in the outward act but in
the spirit which accompanies it. To make it signify more is to admit the sacramental
principle.
</p>

<p>
In the Roman Catholic Church the baptism of bells and of rosaries shows how infant
baptism has induced the belief that grace can be communicated to irrational and even
material things. In Mexico people bring caged birds, cats, rabbits, donkeys, and pigs,
for baptism. The priest kneels before the altar in prayer, reads a few words in Latin,
then sprinkles the creature with holy water. The sprinkling is supposed to drive out
any evil spirit that may have vexed the bird or beast. In Key West, Florida, a town
of 22,000 inhabitants, infant baptism has a stronger hold than anywhere else at the
South. Baptist parents had sometimes gone to the Methodist preachers to have their
children baptized. To prevent this, the Baptist pastors established the custom of laying
their hands upon the heads of infants in the congregation, and <q>blessing</q> them,
<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, asking God's blessing to rest upon them. But this custom came to be confounded
with christening, and was called such. Now the Baptist pastors are having a hard
struggle to explain and limit the custom which they themselves have introduced.
Perverse human nature will take advantage of even the slightest additions to N. T.
prescriptions, and will bring out of the germs of false doctrine a fearful harvest of
evil. Obsta principiis&mdash;<q>Resist beginnings.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='958'/><anchor id='Pg958'/>

<p>
Thirdly,&mdash;in obscuring and corrupting Christian truth with regard to
the sufficiency of Scripture, the connection of the ordinances, and the
inconsistency of an impenitent life with church-membership.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Infant baptism in England is followed by confirmation, as a matter of course,
whether there has been any conscious abandonment of sin or not. In Germany, a
man is always understood to be a Christian unless he expressly states to the contrary&mdash;in
fact, he feels insulted if his Christianity is questioned. At the funerals even of
infidels and debauchees the pall used may be inscribed with the words: <q>Blessed are
the dead that die in the Lord.</q> Confidence in one's Christianity and hopes of heaven
based only on the fact of baptism in infancy, are a great obstacle to evangelical
preaching and to the progress of true religion.
</p>

<p>
Wordsworth, The Excursion, 596, 602 (book 5)&mdash;<q>At the baptismal font. And when
the pure And consecrating element hath cleansed The original stain, the child is thus
received Into the second ark, Christ's church, with trust That he, from wrath redeemed
therein shall float Over the billows of this troublesome world To the fair land of everlasting
life.... The holy rite That lovingly consigns the babe to the arms Of Jesus
and his everlasting care.</q> Infant baptism arose in the superstitious belief that there
lay in the water itself a magical efficacy for the washing away of sin, and that apart
from baptism there could be no salvation. This was and still remains the Roman
Catholic position. Father Doyle, in Anno Domini, 2:182&mdash;<q>Baptism regenerates. By
means of it the child is born again into the newness of the supernatural life.</q> Theodore
Parker was baptized, but not till he was four years old, when his <q>Oh, don't!</q>&mdash;in
which his biographers have found prophetic intimation of his mature dislike for all
conventional forms&mdash;was clearly the small boy's dislike of water on his face; see
Chadwick, Theodore Parker, 6, 7. <q>How do you know, my dear, that you have been
christened?</q> <q>Please, mum, 'cos I've got the marks on my arm now, mum!</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Fourthly,&mdash;in destroying the church as a spiritual body, by merging it
in the nation and the world.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Ladd, Principles of Church Polity: <q>Unitarianism entered the Congregational
churches of New England through the breach in one of their own avowed and most
important tenets, namely, that of a regenerate church-membership. Formalism,
indifferentism, neglect of moral reforms, and, as both cause and results of these, an
abundance of unrenewed men and women, were the causes of their seeming disasters
in that sad epoch.</q> But we would add, that the serious and alarming decline of
religion which culminated in the Unitarian movement in New England had its origin
in infant baptism. This introduced into the Church a multitude of unregenerate
persons and permitted them to determine its doctrinal position.
</p>

<p>
W. B. Matteson: <q>No one practice of the church has done so much to lower the tone
of its life and to debase its standards. The first New England churches were established
by godly and regenerated men. They received into their churches, through
infant baptism, children presumptively, but alas not actually, regenerated. The result
is well known&mdash;swift, startling, seemingly irresistible decline. <q>The body of the rising
generation,</q> writes Increase Mother, <q>is a poor perishing, inconverted, and, except the
Lord pour out his Spirit, an undone generation.</q> The <q>Halfway Covenant</q> was at once
a token of preceding, and a cause of further, decline. If God had not indeed poured
out his Spirit in the great awakening under Edwards, New England might well, as some
feared, <q>be lost even to New England and buried in its own ruins.</q> It was the new
emphasis on personal religion&mdash;an emphasis which the Baptists of that day largely
contributed&mdash;that gave to the New England churches a larger life and a larger usefulness.
Infant baptism has never since held quite the same place in the polity of those
churches. It has very generally declined. But it is still far from extinct, even among
evangelical Protestants. The work of Baptists is not yet done. Baptists have always
stood, but they need still to stand, for a believing and regenerated church-membership.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Fifthly,&mdash;in putting into the place of Christ's command a commandment
of men, and so admitting the essential principle of all heresy, schism, and
false religion.
</p>

<pb n='959'/><anchor id='Pg959'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There is therefore no logical halting-place between the Baptist and the Romanist
positions. The Roman Catholic Archbishop Hughes of New York, said well to a Presbyterian
minister: <q>We have no controversy with you. Our controversy is with the
Baptists.</q> Lange of Jena: <q>Would the Protestant church fulfil and attain to its final
destiny, the baptism of infants must of necessity be abolished.</q> The English Judge
asked the witness what his religious belief was. Reply: <q>I haven't any.</q> <q>Where do
you attend church?</q> <q>Nowhere.</q> <q>Put him down as belonging to the Church of
England.</q> The small child was asked where her mother was. Reply: <q>She has gone
to a Christian and devil meeting.</q> The child meant a Christian Endeavor meeting.
Some systems of doctrine and ritual, however, answer her description, for they are a
mixture of paganism and Christianity. The greatest work favoring the doctrine which
we here condemn is Wall's History of Infant Baptism. For the Baptist side of the
controversy see Arnold, in Madison Avenue Lectures, 160-182; Curtis, Progress of Baptist
Principles, 274, 275; Dagg, Church Order, 144-202.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Lord's Supper.</head>

<p>
The Lord's Supper is that outward rite in which the assembled church
eats bread broken and drinks wine poured forth by its appointed representative,
in token of its constant dependence on the once crucified, now risen
Savior, as source of its spiritual life; or, in other words, in token of that
abiding communion of Christ's death and resurrection through which the
life begun in regeneration is sustained and perfected.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Norman Fox, Christ in the Daily Meal, 31, 33, says that the Scripture nowhere speaks
of the wine as <q>poured forth</q>; and in <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>my body which is broken for you,</hi></q> the Revised
Version omits the word <q><hi rend='italic'>broken</hi></q>; while on the other hand the Gospel according to John
(<hi rend='italic'>19:36</hi>) calls especial attention to the fact that Christ's body was <emph>not</emph> broken. We reply
that Jesus, in giving his disciples the cup, did speak of his blood as <q><hi rend='italic'>poured out</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mark
14:24</hi>); and it was not the body, but <q><hi rend='italic'>a bone of him</hi>,</q> which was not to be broken. Many
ancient manuscripts add the word <q><hi rend='italic'>broken</hi></q> in <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:24</hi>. On the Lord's Supper in general,
see Weston, in Madison Avenue Lectures, 183-195; Dagg, Church Order, 203-214.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. The Lord's Supper an ordinance instituted by Christ.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Christ appointed an outward rite to be observed by his disciples in
remembrance of his death. It was to be observed after his death; only
after his death could it completely fulfil its purpose as a feast of commemoration.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 22:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And be took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave to them, saying, This is my
body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me. And the cup in like manner after supper, saying, This
cup is the new covenant in my blood, even that which is poured out for you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:23-25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For I received of the
Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus in the night in which he was betrayed took bread; and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me. In
like manner also the cup, after supper, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood: this do, as often as ye drink
it, in remembrance of me.</hi></q> Observe that this communion was Christian communion before
Christ's death, just as John's baptism was Christian baptism before Christ's death.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From the apostolic injunction with regard to its celebration in the
church until Christ's second coming, we infer that it was the original intention
of our Lord to institute a rite of perpetual and universal obligation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye proclaim the Lord's death till he come</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 26:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But I say unto you, I shall not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it
new with you in my Father's kingdom</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mark 14:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Verily I say unto you, I will no more drink of the fruit of
the vine, until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.</hi></q> As the paschal supper continued
until Christ came the first time in the flesh, so the Lord's Supper is to continue until he
comes the second time with all the power and glory of God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The uniform practice of the N. T. churches, and the celebration of
such a rite in subsequent ages by almost all churches professing to be
<pb n='960'/><anchor id='Pg960'/>
Christian, is best explained upon the supposition that the Lord's Supper is
an ordinance established by Christ himself.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:42</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And they continued stedfastly in the apostles' teaching and fellowship, in the breaking of bread and
the prayers</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And day by day, continuing stedfastly with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home,
they took their food with gladness and singleness of heart</hi></q>&mdash;on the words here translated <q><hi rend='italic'>at home</hi></q> (κατ᾽
οἶκον), but meaning, as Jacob maintains, <q>from one worship-room to another,</q> see
page <ref target='Pg961'>961</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And upon the first day of the week, when we were gathered together to break bread, Paul
discoursed with them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not a communion of the body of Christ? seeing that we, who art many, are
one bread, one body: for we all partake of the one bread.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. The Mode of administering the Lord's Supper.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The elements are bread and wine.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Although the bread which Jesus broke at the institution of the ordinance was doubtless
the unleavened bread of the Passover, there is nothing in the symbolism of the
Lord's Supper which necessitates the Romanist use of the wafer. Although the wine
which Jesus poured out was doubtless the ordinary fermented juice of the grape, there
is nothing in the symbolism of the ordinance which forbids the use of unfermented
juice of the grape,&mdash;obedience to the command <q><hi rend='italic'>This do in remembrance of me</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 22:19</hi>)
requires only that we should use the <q><hi rend='italic'>fruit of the vine</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 26:29</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Huguenots and Roman Catholics, among Parkman's Pioneers of France in the New
World, disputed whether the sacramental bread could be made of the meal of Indian
corn. But it is only as food, that the bread is symbolic. Dried fish is used in Greenland.
The bread only symbolizes Christ's life and the wine only symbolizes his death.
Any food or drink may do the same. It therefore seems a very conscientious but
unnecessary literalism, when Adoniram Judson (Life by his Son, 352) writes from
Burma: <q>No wine to be procured in this place, on which account we are unable to
meet with the other churches this day in partaking of the Lord's Supper.</q> For proof
that Bible wines, like all other wines, are fermented, see Presb. Rev., 1881:80-114; 1882:78-108,
394-399, 586; Hovey, in Bap. Quar. Rev., April, 1887:152-180. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Samson,
Bible Wines. On the Scripture Law of Temperance, see Presb. Rev., 1882:287-324.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The communion is of both kinds,&mdash;that is, communicants are to
partake both of the bread and of the wine.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Roman Catholic Church withholds the wine from the laity, although it considers
the whole Christ to be present under each of the forms. Christ, however, says: <q><hi rend='italic'>Drink
ye all of it</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 26:27</hi>). To withhold the wine from any believer is disobedience to Christ,
and is too easily understood as teaching that the laity have only a portion of the benefits
of Christ's death. Calvin: <q>As to the bread, he simply said <q><hi rend='italic'>Take, eat</hi>.</q> Why does he
expressly bid them <emph>all</emph> drink? And why does Mark explicitly say that <q><hi rend='italic'>they all drank of it</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Mark 14:23</hi>)?</q> Bengel: Does not this suggest that, if communion in <q>one kind alone
were sufficient, it is the cup which should be used? The Scripture thus speaks, foreseeing
what Rome would do.</q> See Expositor's Greek Testament on <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:27</hi>. In the
Greek Church the bread and wine are mingled and are administered to communicants,
not to infants only but also to adults, with a spoon.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The partaking of these elements is of a festal nature.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Passover was festal in its nature. Gloom and sadness are foreign to the spirit of
the Lord's Supper. The wine is the symbol of the death of Christ, but of that death by
which we live. It reminds us that he drank the cup of suffering in order that we might
drink the wine of joy. As the bread is broken to sustain our physical life, so Christ's
body was broken by thorns and nails and spear to nourish our spiritual life.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For he that eateth and drinketh, eateth and drinketh judgment onto himself, if he discern not the
body.</hi></q> Here the Authorized Version wrongly had <q>damnation</q> instead of <q><hi rend='italic'>judgment</hi>.</q> Not
eternal condemnation, but penal judgment in general, is meant. He who partakes <q><hi rend='italic'>in
an unworthy manner</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>verse 27</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, in hypocrisy, or merely to satisfy bodily appetites, and
not discerning the body of Christ of which the bread is the symbol (<hi rend='italic'>verse 29</hi>), draws
down upon him God's judicial sentence. Of this judgment, the frequent sickness and
death in the church at Corinth was a token. See <hi rend='italic'>verses 30-34</hi>, and Meyer's Com.; also
<pb n='961'/><anchor id='Pg961'/>
Gould, in Am. Com. on <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>unworthily</hi></q>&mdash;<q>This is not to be understood as
referring to the unworthiness of the person himself to partake, but to the unworthy
manner of partaking.... The failure to recognize practically the symbolism of the
elements, and hence the treatment of the Supper as a common meal, is just what the
apostle has pointed out as the fault of the Corinthians, and it is what he characterizes
as an unworthy eating and drinking.</q> The Christian therefore should not be deterred
from participation in the Lord's Supper by any feeling of his personal unworthiness,
so long as he trusts Christ and aims to obey him, for <q>All the fitness he requireth Is to
feel our need of him.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The communion is a festival of commemoration,&mdash;not simply bringing
Christ to our remembrance, but making proclamation of his death to
the world.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:24, 26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>this do in remembrance of me.... For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye
proclaim the Lord's death till he come.</hi></q> As the Passover commemorated the deliverance of Israel
from Egypt, and as the Fourth of July commemorates our birth as a nation, so the
Lord's Supper commemorates the birth of the church in Christ's death and resurrection.
As a mother might bid her children meet over her grave and commemorate her,
so Christ bids his people meet and remember him. But subjective remembrance is not
its only aim. It is public proclamation also. Whether it brings perceptible blessing to
us or not, it is to be observed as a means of confessing Christ, testifying our faith, and
publishing the fact of his death to others.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) It is to be celebrated by the assembled church. It is not a solitary
observance on the part of individuals. No <q>showing forth</q> is possible
except in company.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>gathered together to break bread</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:18, 20, 22, 33, 34</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when ye come together in the
church ... assemble yourselves together ... have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the church
of God, and put them to shame that have not? ... when ye come together to eat.... If any man is hungry, let
him eat at home; that your coming together be not unto judgment.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Jacob, Eccl. Polity of N. T., 191-194, claims that in <hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>breaking bread at home</hi></q>&mdash;where
we have οἶκος, not οἶκία, οἶκος is not a private house, but a <q>worship-room,</q> and
that the phrase should be translated <q>breaking bread from one worship-room to
another,</q> or <q>in various worship-rooms.</q> This meaning seems very apt in <hi rend='italic'>Acts 5:42</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And
every day, in the temple and at home</hi> [rather, <q><hi rend='italic'>in various worship-rooms</hi></q>], they ceased not to teach and to
preach Jesus as the Christ</q>; <hi rend='italic'>8:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But Saul laid waste the church, entering into every house</hi> [rather, <q><hi rend='italic'>every
worship-room</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>and dragging men and women committed them to prison</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 16:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>salute the church that is in
their house</hi> [rather, <q><hi rend='italic'>in their worship-room</hi></q>]</q>; <hi rend='italic'>Titus 1:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>men who overthrow whole houses</hi> [rather,
<q><hi rend='italic'>whole worship-rooms</hi></q>], <hi rend='italic'>teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, however,
see <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:34</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>let him eat at home,</hi></q> where οἶκος is contrasted with the place of meeting; so
also <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 14:35</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:20</hi>, where οἶκος seems to mean a private house.
</p>

<p>
The celebration of the Lord's Supper in each family by itself is not recognized in the
New Testament. Stanley, in Nineteenth Century, May, 1878, tells us that as infant communion
is forbidden in the Western Church, and evening communion is forbidden by
the Roman Church, so solitary communion is forbidden by the English Church, and
death-bed communion by the Scottish Church. E. G. Robinson: <q>No single individual
in the New Testament ever celebrates the Lord's Supper by himself.</q> Mrs.
Browning recognized the essentially social nature of the ordinance, when she said that
truth was like the bread at the Sacrament&mdash;to be passed on. In this the Supper gives
us a type of the proper treatment of all the goods of life, both temporal and spiritual.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Norman Fox, Christ in the Daily Meal, claims that the Lord's Supper is no more
an exclusively church ordinance than is singing or prayer; that the command to
observe it was addressed, not to an organized church, but only to individuals; that every
meal in the home was to be a Lord's Supper, because Christ was remembered in it. But
we reply that Paul's letter with regard to the abuses of the Lord's Supper was
addressed, not to individuals, but to <q><hi rend='italic'>the church of God which is at Corinth.</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:2</hi>). Paul
reproves the Corinthians because in the Lord's Supper each ate without thought of
others: <q><hi rend='italic'>What, have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the church of God, and put them to shame
that have not?</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>11:22</hi>). Each member having appeased his hunger at home, the members of
the church <q><hi rend='italic'>come together to eat</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>11:30</hi>), as the spiritual body of Christ. All this shows that
the celebration of the Lord's Supper was not an appendage to every ordinary meal.
</p>

<pb n='962'/><anchor id='Pg962'/>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>upon the first day of the week, when we were gathered together to break bread, Paul discoursed with
them</hi></q>&mdash;the natural inference is that the Lord's Supper was a sacred rite, observed apart
from any ordinary meal, and accompanied by religious instruction. Dr. Fox would go
back of these later observances to the original command of our Lord. He would eliminate
all that we do not find in Mark, the earliest gospel. But this would deprive us of
the Sermon on the Mount, the parable of the Prodigal Son, and the discourses of the
fourth gospel. McGiffert gives A. D. 52, as the date of Paul's first letter to the Corinthians,
and this ante-dates Mark's gospel by at least thirteen years. Paul's account of
the Lord's Supper at Corinth is therefore an earlier authority than Mark.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) The responsibility of seeing that the ordinance is properly administered
rests with the church as a body; and the pastor is, in this matter, the
proper representative and organ of the church. In cases of extreme
exigency, however, as where the church has no pastor and no ordained
minister can be secured, it is competent for the church to appoint one from
its own number to administer the ordinance.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:2, 23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now I praise you that ye remember me in all things, and hold fast the traditions, even as I delivered
them to you.... For I received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus in the night in
which he was betrayed took bread.</hi></q> Here the responsibility of administering the Lord's Supper
is laid upon the body of believers.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) The frequency with which the Lord's Supper is to be administered
is not indicated either by the N. T. precept or by uniform N. T. example.
We have instances both of its daily and of its weekly observance. With
respect to this, as well as with respect to the accessories of the ordinance,
the church is to exercise a sound discretion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And day by day, continuing stedfastly with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home</hi>
[or perhaps, <q><hi rend='italic'>in various worship-rooms</hi></q>]</q>; <hi rend='italic'>20:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And upon the first day of the week, when we were
gathered together to break bread.</hi></q> In 1878, thirty-nine churches of the Establishment in London
held daily communion; in two churches it was held twice each day. A few churches of
the Baptist faith in England and America celebrate the Lord's Supper on each Lord's
day. Carlstadt would celebrate the Lord's Supper only in companies of twelve, and
held also that every bishop must marry. Reclining on couches, and meeting in the
evening, are not commanded; and both, by their inconvenience, might in modern
times counteract the design of the ordinance.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. The Symbolism of the Lord's Supper.</head>

<p>
The Lord's Supper sets forth, in general, the death of Christ as the
sustaining power of the believer's life.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. Expansion of this statement.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It symbolizes the death of Christ for our sins.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye proclaim the Lord's death till he come</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mark 14:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many</hi></q>&mdash;the blood upon which
the covenant between God and Christ, and so between God and us who are one with
Christ, from eternity past was based. The Lord's Supper reminds us of the covenant
which ensures our salvation, and of the atonement upon which the covenant was
based; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 13:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>blood of an eternal covenant.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Alex. McLaren: <q>The suggestion of a violent death, implied in the <emph>doubling</emph> of the
symbols, by which the body is separated from that of the blood, and still further
implied in the <emph>breaking</emph> of the bread, is made prominent in the words in reference to
the cup. It symbolizes the blood of Jesus which is <q>shed.</q> That shed blood is covenant
blood. By it the New Covenant, of which Jeremiah had prophesied, one article
of which was, <q>Their sins and iniquities I will remember no more,</q> is sealed and ratified,
not for Israel only but for an indefinite <q>many,</q> which is really equivalent to all.
Could words more plainly declare that Christ's death was a sacrifice? Can we understand
it, according to his own interpretation of it, unless we see in his words here a
reference to his previous words (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 20:28</hi>) and recognize that in shedding his blood
<pb n='963'/><anchor id='Pg963'/>
<q>for many,</q> he <q>gave his life a ransom for many</q>? The Lord's Supper is the standing
witness, voiced by Jesus himself, that he regarded his death as the very centre of
his work, and that he regarded it not merely as a martyrdom, but as a sacrifice by which
he put away sins forever. Those who reject that view of that death are sorely puzzled
what to make of the Lord's Supper.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It symbolizes our personal appropriation of the benefits of that death.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>This is my body, which is for you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 5:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Christ our passover is sacrificed for us</hi></q>;
or R. V.&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>our passover also hath been sacrificed, even Christ</hi></q>; here it is evident not only that the
showing forth of the Lord's death is the primary meaning of the ordinance, but that
our partaking of the benefits of that death is as clearly taught as the Israelites' deliverance
was symbolized in the paschal supper.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It symbolizes the method of this appropriation, through union with
Christ himself.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a communion of</hi> [marg.: <q><hi rend='italic'>participation in</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not a communion of</hi> [marg.: <q><hi rend='italic'>participation in</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>the body of
Christ?</hi></q> Here <q><hi rend='italic'>is it not a participation</hi></q> = <q>does it not symbolize the participation?</q> So <hi rend='italic'>Mat.
26:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>this is my body</hi></q> = <q>this symbolizes my body.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) It symbolizes the continuous dependence of the believer for all
spiritual life upon the once crucified, now living, Savior, to whom he is
thus united.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>John 6:53</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye
have not life in yourselves</hi></q>&mdash;here is a statement, not with regard to the Lord's Supper, but
with regard to spiritual union with Christ, which the Lord's Supper only symbolizes;
see page <ref target='Pg965'>965</ref>, (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>). Like Baptism, the Lord's Supper presupposes and implies evangelical
faith, especially faith in the Deity of Christ; not that all who partake of it realize its
full meaning, but that this participation logically implies the five great truths of
Christ's preëxistence, his supernatural birth, his vicarious atonement, his literal resurrection,
and his living presence with his followers. Because Ralph Waldo Emerson
perceived that the Lord's Supper implied Christ's omnipresence and deity, he would no
longer celebrate it, and so broke with his church and with the ministry.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) It symbolizes the sanctification of the Christian through a spiritual
reproduction in him of the death and resurrection of the Lord.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the spirit is life because of righteousness</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings,
becoming conformed unto his death; if by any means I may attain unto the resurrection from the dead.</hi></q> The bread
of life nourishes; but it transforms me, not I it.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) It symbolizes the consequent union of Christians in Christ, their
head.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>seeing that we, who are many, are one bread, one body: for we all partake of the one bread.</hi></q> The
Roman Catholic says that bread is the unity of many kernels, the wine the unity of
many berries, and all are changed into the body of Christ. We can adopt the former
part of the statement, without taking the latter. By being united to Christ, we become
united to one another; and the Lord's Supper, as it symbolizes our common partaking
of Christ, symbolizes also the consequent oneness of all in whom Christ dwells. Teaching
of the Twelve Apostles, IX&mdash;<q>As this broken bread was scattered upon the
mountains, and being gathered together became one, so may thy church be gathered
together from the ends of the earth into thy kingdom.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) It symbolizes the coming joy and perfection of the kingdom of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 22:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>for I say unto you, I shall not drink from henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of
God shall come</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mark 14:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Verily I say unto you, I will no more drink of the fruit of the vine, until that day
when I drink it new in the kingdom of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 26:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But I say unto you, I shall not drink henceforth of this
fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Like Baptism, which points forward to the resurrection, the Lord's Supper is anticipatory
<pb n='964'/><anchor id='Pg964'/>
also. It brings before us, not simply death, but life; not simply past sacrifice,
but future glory. It points forward to the great festival, <q><hi rend='italic'>the marriage supper of the Lamb</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 19:9</hi>). Dorner: <q>Then Christ will keep the Supper anew with us, and the hours
of highest solemnity in this life are but a weak foretaste of the powers of the world to
come.</q> See Madison Avenue Lectures, 176-216; The Lord's Supper, a Clerical Symposium,
by Pressensé, Luthardt, and English Divines.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. Inferences from this statement.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The connection between the Lord's Supper and Baptism consists in
this, that they both and equally are symbols of the death of Christ. In
Baptism, we show forth the death of Christ as the procuring cause of our
new birth into the kingdom of God. In the Lord's Supper, we show forth
the death of Christ as the sustaining power of our spiritual life after it has
once begun. In the one, we honor the sanctifying power of the death of
Christ, as in the other we honor its regenerating power. Thus both are
parts of one whole,&mdash;setting before us Christ's death for men in its two
great purposes and results.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
If baptism symbolized purification only, there would be no point of connection
between the two ordinances. Their common reference to the death of Christ binds the
two together.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The Lord's Supper is to be often repeated,&mdash;as symbolizing Christ's
constant nourishment of the soul, whose new birth was signified in Baptism.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Yet too frequent repetition may induce superstitious confidence in the value of communion
as a mere outward form.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The Lord's Supper, like Baptism, is the symbol of a previous state
of grace. It has in itself no regenerating and no sanctifying power, but is
the symbol by which the relation of the believer to Christ, his sanctifier, is
vividly expressed and strongly confirmed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We derive more help from the Lord's Supper than from private prayer, simply
because it is an <emph>external</emph> rite, impressing the sense as well as the intellect, celebrated in
company with other believers whose faith and devotion help our own, and bringing
before us the profoundest truths of Christianity&mdash;the death of Christ, and our union
with Christ in that death.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The blessing received from participation is therefore dependent
upon, and proportioned to, the faith of the communicant.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In observing the Lord's Supper, we need to discern the body of the Lord (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:29</hi>)&mdash;that
is, to recognize the spiritual meaning of the ordinance, and the presence of
Christ, who through his deputed representatives gives to us the emblems, and who
nourishes and quickens our souls as these material things nourish and quicken the
body. The faith which thus discerns Christ is the gift of the Holy Spirit.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The Lord's Supper expresses primarily the fellowship of the believer,
not with his brethren, but with Christ, his Lord.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Lord's Supper, like Baptism, symbolizes fellowship with the brethren only as
consequent upon, and incidental to, fellowship with Christ. Just as we are all baptized
<q><hi rend='italic'>into one body</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:13</hi>) only by being <q><hi rend='italic'>baptized into Christ</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:3</hi>), so we commune with
other believers in the Lord's Supper, only as we commune with Christ. Christ's words:
<q><hi rend='italic'>this do in remembrance of me</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:24</hi>), bid us think, not of our brethren, but of the
Lord. Baptism is not a test of personal worthiness. Nor is the Lord's Supper a test of
personal worthiness, either our own or that of others. It is not primarily an expression
of Christian fellowship. Nowhere in the New Testament is it called a communion of
Christians with one another. But it is called a communion of the body and blood of
Christ (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:16</hi>)&mdash;or, in other words, a participation in him. Hence there is not a
single cup, but many: <q><hi rend='italic'>divide it among yourselves</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 22:17</hi>). Here is warrant for the individual
<pb n='965'/><anchor id='Pg965'/>
communion-cup. Most churches use more than one cup: if more than one,
why not many?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as often as ye eat ... ye proclaim the Lord's death</hi></q>&mdash;the Lord's Supper is a teaching
ordinance, and is to be observed, not simply for the good that comes to the communicant
and to his brethren, but for the sake of the witness which it gives to the
world that the Christ who died for its sins now lives for its salvation. A. H. Ballard,
in The Standard, Aug. 18, 1900, on <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>eateth and drinketh judgment unto himself, if he discern
not the body</hi></q>&mdash;<q>He who eats and drinks, and does not discern that he is redeemed by
the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all, eats and drinks a double condemnation,
because he does not discern the redemption which is symbolized by the things
which he eats and drinks. To turn his thought away from that sacrificial body to the
company of disciples assembled is a grievous error&mdash;the error of all those who exalt
the idea of fellowship or communion in the celebration of the ordinance.</q>
</p>

<p>
The offence of a Christian brother, therefore, even if committed against myself,
should not prevent me from remembering Christ and communing with the Savior. I
could not commune at all, if I had to vouch for the Christian character of all who sat
with me. This does not excuse the church from effort to purge its membership from
unworthy participants; it simply declares that the church's failure to do this does not
absolve any single member of it from his obligation to observe the Lord's Supper. See
Jacob, Eccl. Polity of N. T., 285.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. Erroneous views of the Lord's Supper.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. The Romanist view.</head>

<p>
The Romanist view,&mdash;that the bread and wine are changed by
priestly consecration into the very body and blood of Christ; that this consecration
is a new offering of Christ's sacrifice; and that, by a physical
partaking of the elements, the communicant receives saving grace from
God. To this doctrine of <q>transubstantiation</q> we reply:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It rests upon a false interpretation of Scripture. In Mat. 26:26,
<q>this is my body</q> means: <q>this is a symbol of my body.</q> Since Christ
was with the disciples in visible form at the institution of the Supper, he
could not have intended them to recognize the bread as being his literal
body. <q>The body of Christ is present in the bread, just as it had been in
the passover lamb, of which the bread took the place</q> (John 6:53 contains
no reference to the Lord's Supper, although it describes that spiritual union
with Christ which the Supper symbolizes; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 63. In 1 Cor. 10:16, 17,
κοινωίαν τοῦ σώματος τοῦ Χριστοῦ is a figurative expression for the spiritual
partaking of Christ. In Mark 8:33, we are not to infer that Peter was
actually <q>Satan,</q> nor does 1 Cor. 12:12 prove that we are all Christs. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
Gen. 41:26; 1 Cor. 10:4).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 26:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>This is my blood ... which is poured out,</hi></q> cannot be meant to be taken literally,
since Christ's blood was not yet shed. Hence the Douay version (Roman Catholic),
without warrant, changes the tense and reads, <q>which shall be shed.</q> At the institution
of the Supper, it is not conceivable that Christ should hold his body in his
own hands, and then break it to the disciples. There were not two bodies there.
Zwingle: <q>The words of institution are not the mandatory <q>become</q>: they are only an
explanation of the sign.</q> When I point to a picture and say: <q>This is George Washington,</q>
I do not mean that the veritable body and blood of George Washington are
before me. So when a teacher points to a map and says: <q>This is New York,</q> or when
Jesus refers to John the Baptist, and says: <q><hi rend='italic'>this is Elijah, that is to come</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 11:14</hi>). Jacob,
The Lord's Supper, Historically Considered&mdash;<q>It originally marked, not a real presence,
but a real absence, of Christ as the Son of God made man</q>&mdash;that is, a real absence of
his <emph>body</emph>. Therefore the Supper, reminding us of his body, is to be observed in the
church <q><hi rend='italic'>till he come</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:26</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 6:53</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have not life in yourselves</hi></q> must
be interpreted by <hi rend='italic'>verse 63</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>It is the spirit that giveth life; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I have
spoken unto you are spirit, and are life.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a communion
of</hi> [marg.: <q><hi rend='italic'>participation in</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not a communion of</hi> [marg.
<pb n='966'/><anchor id='Pg966'/>
<q><hi rend='italic'>participation in</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>the body of Christ?</hi></q>&mdash;see Expositor's Greek Testament, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Mark 8:33</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But
he turning about, and seeing his disciples, rebuked Peter, and saith, Get thee behind me, Satan</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor.
12:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of the body, being many, are one
body; so also is Christ.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 41:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are seven
years: the dream is one;</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they drank of a spiritual rock that followed them: and the rock was Christ.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Queen Elizabeth: <q>Christ was the Word that spake it: He took the bread and brake
it; And what that Word did make it, That I believe and take it.</q> Yes, we say; but
what does the Lord make it? Not his body, but only a symbol of his body. Sir Thomas
More went back to the doctrine of transubstantiation which the wisdom of his age
was almost unanimous in rejecting. In his Utopia, written to earlier years, he had
made deism the ideal religion. Extreme Romanism was his reaction from this former
extreme. Bread and wine are mere remembrancers, as were the lamb and bitter herbs
at the Passover. The partaker is spiritually affected by the bread and wine, only as
was the pious Israelite in receiving the paschal symbols; see Norman Fox, Christ in the
Daily Meal, 25, 42.
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson: <q>The greatest power in Romanism is its power of visible representation.
Ritualism is only elaborate symbolism. It is interesting to remember that this
prostration of the priest before the consecrated wafer is no part of even original
Roman Catholicism.</q> Stanley, Life and Letters, 2:213&mdash;<q>The pope, when he celebrates
the communion, always stands in exactly the opposite direction [to that of modern
ritualists], not with his back but with his face to the people, no doubt following the
primitive usage.</q> So in Raphael's picture of the Miracle of Bolsina, the priest is at the
north end of the table, in the very attitude of a Protestant clergyman. Pfleiderer,
Philos. Religion, 2:211&mdash;<q>The unity of the bread, of which each enjoys a part, represents
the unity of the body of Christ, which consists in the community of believers.
If we are to speak of a presence of the body of Christ in the Lord's Supper, that can
only be thought of, in the sense of Paul, as pertaining to the mystical body, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, the
Christian Community. Augustine and Zwingle, who have expressed most clearly this
meaning of the Supper, have therefore caught quite correctly the sense of the Apostle.</q>
</p>

<p>
Norman Fox, Christ in the Daily Meal, 40-53&mdash;<q>The phrase <q>consecration of the elements</q>
is unwarranted. The leaven and the mustard seed were in no way consecrated
when Jesus pronounced them symbols of divine things. The bread and wine are not
arbitrarily appointed remembrancers, they are remembrancers in their very nature.
There is no change in them. So every other loaf is a symbol, as well as that used in the
Supper. When St. Patrick held up the shamrock as the symbol of the Trinity, he
meant that every such sprig was the same. Only the bread of the daily meal is Christ's
body. Only the washing of dirty feet is the fulfilment of Christ's command. The loaf
not eaten to satisfy hunger is not Christ's symbolic body at all.</q> Here we must part
company with Dr. Fox. We grant the natural fitness of the elements for which he
contends. But we hold also to a divine appointment of the bread and wine for a
special and sacred use, even as the <q><hi rend='italic'>bow in the cloud</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gen. 9:13</hi>), because it was a natural
emblem, was consecrated to a special religious use.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It contradicts the evidence of the senses, as well as of all scientific
tests that can be applied. If we cannot trust our senses as to the unchanged
material qualities of bread and wine, we cannot trust them when they
report to us the words of Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Gibbon was rejoiced at the discovery that, while the real presence is attested by only
a single sense&mdash;our sight [as employed in reading the words of Christ]&mdash;the real presence
is disproved by three of our senses, sight, touch, and taste. It is not well to purchase
faith in this dogma at the price of absolute scepticism. Stanley, on Baptism, in
his Christian Institutions, tells us that, in the third and fourth centuries, the belief that
the water of baptism was changed into the blood of Christ was nearly as firmly and
widely fixed as the belief that the bread and wine of the communion were changed into
his flesh and blood. Döllinger: <q>When I am told that I must swear to the truth of
these doctrines [of papal infallibility and apostolic succession], my feeling is just as if
I were asked to swear that two and two make five, and not four.</q> Teacher: <q>Why
did Henry VIII quarrel with the pope?</q> Scholar: <q>Because the pope had commanded
him to put away his wife on pain of transubstantiation.</q> The transubstantiation of
Henry VIII is quite as rational as the transubstantiation of the bread and wine in the
Eucharist.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='967'/><anchor id='Pg967'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It involves the denial of the completeness of Christ's past sacrifice,
and the assumption that a human priest can repeat or add to the atonement
made by Christ once for all (Heb. 9:28&mdash;ἅπαξ προσενεχθείς). The Lord's
Supper is never called a sacrifice, nor are altars, priests, or consecrations
ever spoken of, in the New Testament. The priests of the old dispensation
are expressly contrasted with the ministers of the new. The former
<q>ministered about sacred things,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, performed sacred rites and waited
at the altar; but the latter <q>preach the gospel</q> (1 Cor. 9:13, 14).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 9:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>so Christ also, having been once offered</hi></q>&mdash;here ἅπαξ means <q>once for all,</q> as in <hi rend='italic'>Jude 3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the
faith which was once for all delivered unto the saints</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 9:13, 14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Know ye not that they that minister
about sacred things eat of the things of the temple, and they that wait upon the altar have their portion with the
altar? Even so did the Lord ordain that they that proclaim the gospel should live of the gospel.</hi></q> Romanism
introduces a mediator between the soul and Christ, namely, bread and wine,&mdash;and the
priest besides.
</p>

<p>
Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:680-687 (Syst. Doct., 4: 146-163)&mdash;<q>Christ is thought of as at
a distance, and as represented only by the priest who offers anew his sacrifice. But
Protestant doctrine holds to a perfect Christ, applying the benefits of the work which
he long ago and once for all completed upon the cross.</q> Chillingworth: <q>Romanists
hold that the validity of every sacrament but baptism depends upon its administration
by a priest; and without priestly absolution there is no assurance of forgiveness. But
the intention of the priest is essential in pronouncing absolution, and the intention of
the bishop is essential in consecrating the priest. How can any human being know
that these conditions are fulfilled?</q> In the New Testament, on the other hand, Christ
appears as the only priest, and each human soul has direct access to him.
</p>

<p>
Norman Fox, Christ in the Daily Meal, 22&mdash;<q>The adherence of the first Christians to
the Mosaic law makes it plain that they did not hold the doctrine of the modern Church
of Rome that the bread of the Supper is a sacrifice, the table an altar, and the minister
a priest. For the old altar, the old sacrifice, and the old priesthood still remained, and
were still in their view appointed media of atonement with God. Of course they could
not have believed in two altars, two priesthoods and two contemporaneous sets of
sacrifices.</q> Christ is the only priest. A. A. Hodge, Popular Lectures, 257&mdash;<q>The three
central dangerous errors of Romanism and Ritualism are: 1. the perpetuity of the
apostolate; 2. the priestly character and offices of Christian ministers; 3. the sacramental
principle, or the depending upon sacraments, as the essential, initial, and ordinary
channels of grace.</q> <q>Hierarchy,</q> says another, <q>is an infraction of the divine
order; it imposes the weight of an outworn symbolism on the true vitalities of the
gospel; it is a remnant rent from the shroud of the dead past, to enwrap the limbs of
the living present.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) It destroys Christianity by externalizing it. Romanists make all
other service a mere appendage to the communion. Physical and magical
salvation is not Christianity, but is essential paganism.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Council of Trent, Session VII, On Sacraments in General, Canon IV: <q>If any one
saith that the sacraments of the New Testament are not necessary to salvation, but are
superfluous, and that without them, and without the desire thereof, men attain of
God, through faith alone, the grace of justification; though all [the sacraments] are
not indeed necessary for every individual: let him be anathema.</q> On Baptism, Canon
IV: <q>If any one saith that the baptism which is even given by heretics in the name
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, with the intention of doing what the church doth,
is not true baptism, let him be anathema.</q> Baptism, in the Romanist system, is necessary
to salvation: and baptism, even though administered by heretics, is an admission
to the church. All baptized persons who, through no fault of their own, but from
lack of knowledge or opportunity, are not connected outwardly with the true church,
though they are apparently attached to some sect, yet in reality belong <emph>to the soul</emph> of the
true church. Many belong merely <emph>to the body</emph> of the Catholic church, and are counted
as its members, but do not belong <emph>to its soul</emph>. So says Archbishop Lynch, of Toronto;
and Pius IX extended the doctrine of invincible ignorance, so as to cover the case of
every dissentient from the church whose life shows faith working by love.
</p>

<pb n='968'/><anchor id='Pg968'/>

<p>
Adoration of the Host (Latin <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>hostia</foreign>, victim) is a regular part of the service of the
Mass. If the Romanist view were correct that the bread and wine were actually
changed into the body and blood of Christ, we could not call this worship idolatry.
Christ's body in the sepulchre could not have been a proper object of worship, but it
was so after his resurrection, when it became animated with a new and divine life.
The Romanist error is that of holding that the priest has power to transform the elements;
the worship of them follows as a natural consequence, and is none the less
idolatrous for being based upon the false assumption that the bread and wine are really
Christ's body and blood.
</p>

<p>
The Roman Catholic system involves many absurdities, but the central absurdity is
that of making religion a matter of machinery and outward manipulation. Dr. R. S.
MacArthur calls sacramentalism <q>the pipe-line conception of grace.</q> There is no
patent Romanist plumbing. Dean Stanley said that John Henry Newman <q>made
immortality the consequence of frequent participation of the Holy Communion.</q> Even
Faber made game of the notion, and declared that it <q>degraded celebrations to be so
many breadfruit trees.</q> It is this transformation of the Lord's Supper into the Mass
that turns the church into <q>the Church of the Intonement.</q> <q>Cardinal Gibbons,</q> it
was once said, <q>makes his own God&mdash;the wafer.</q> His error is at the root of the super-sanctity
and celibacy of the Romanist clergy, and President Garrett forgot this when
he made out the pass on his railway for <q>Cardinal Gibbons and wife.</q> Dr. C. H.
Parkhurst: <q>There is no more place for an altar in a Christian church than there is
for a golden calf.</q> On the word <q>priest</q> in the N. T., see Gardiner, in O. T. Student,
Nov. 1889:285-291; also Bowen, in Theol. Monthly, Nov. 1889:316-329. For the Romanist
view, see Council of Trent, session XIII, canon III: <hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>, see Calvin, Institutes,
2:585-602; C. Hebert, The Lord's Supper: History of Uninspired Teaching.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. The Lutheran and High Church view.</head>

<p>
The Lutheran and High Church view,&mdash;that the communicant, in
partaking of the consecrated elements, eats the veritable body and drinks
the veritable blood of Christ in and with the bread and wine, although the
elements themselves do not cease to be material. To this doctrine of
<q>consubstantiation</q> we object:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That the view is not required by Scripture.&mdash;All the passages cited
in its support may be better interpreted as referring to a partaking of the
elements as symbols. If Christ's body be ubiquitous, as this theory holds,
we partake of it at every meal, as really as at the Lord's Supper.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the view is inseparable from the general sacramental system of
which it forms a part.&mdash;In imposing physical and material conditions of
receiving Christ, it contradicts the doctrine of justification only by faith;
changes the ordinance from a sign, into a means, of salvation; involves the
necessity of a sacerdotal order for the sake of properly consecrating the
elements; and logically tends to the Romanist conclusions of ritualism and
idolatry.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That it holds each communicant to be a partaker of Christ's veritable
body and blood, whether he be a believer or not,&mdash;the result, in the absence
of faith, being condemnation instead of salvation. Thus the whole character
of the ordinance is changed from a festival occasion to one of mystery
and fear, and the whole gospel method of salvation is obscured.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Encyc. Britannica, art.: Luther, 15:81&mdash;<q>Before the peasants' war, Luther regarded
the sacrament as a secondary matter, compared with the right view of faith. In alarm
at this war and at Carlstadt's mysticism, he determined to abide by the tradition of the
church, and to alter as little as possible. He could not accept transubstantiation, and
he sought a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>via media</foreign>. Occam gave it to him. According to Occam, matter can be
present in two ways, first, when it occupies a distinct place by itself, excluding every
other body, as two stones mutually exclude each other; and, secondly, when it occupies
the same space as another body at the same time. Everything which is omnipresent
must occupy the same space as other things, else it could not be ubiquitous. Hence
<pb n='969'/><anchor id='Pg969'/>
consubstantiation involved no miracle. Christ's body was in the bread and wine
naturally, and was not brought into the elements by the priest. It brought a blessing,
not because of Christ's presence, but because of God's promise that this particular
presence of the body of Christ should bring blessings to the faithful partaker.</q>
Broadus, Am. Com. on Mat., 529&mdash;<q>Luther does not say how Christ is in the bread and
wine, but his followers have compared his presence to that of heat or magnetism in
iron. But how then could this presence be in the bread and wine separately?</q>
</p>

<p>
For the view here combated, see Gerhard, x: 352&mdash;<q>The bread, apart from the sacrament
instituted by Christ, is not the body of Christ, and therefore it is ἀρτολατρία (bread-worship)
to adore the bread in these solemn processions</q> (of the Roman Catholic
church). 397&mdash;<q>Faith does not belong to the substance of the Eucharist; hence it is
not the faith of him who partakes that makes the bread a communication of the body
of Christ; nor on account of unbelief in him who partakes does the bread cease to be a
communication of the body of Christ.</q> See also Sadler, Church Doctrine, 124-199;
Pusey, Tract No. 90, of the Tractarian Series; Wilberforce, New Birth; Nevins, Mystical
Presence.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Calvin, Institutes, 2:525-584; G. P. Fisher, in Independent, May 1, 1884&mdash;<q>Calvin
differed from Luther, in holding that Christ is received only by the believer.
He differed from Zwingle, in holding that Christ is truly, though spiritually, received.</q>
See also E. G. Robinson, in Baptist Quarterly, 1869:85-109; Rogers, Priests and Sacraments.
Consubstantiation accounts for the doctrine of apostolic succession and for
the universal ritualism of the Lutheran Church. Bowing at the name of Jesus, however,
is not, as has been sometimes maintained, a relic of the papal worship of the
Real Presence, but is rather a reminiscence of the fourth century, when controversies
about the person of Christ rendered orthodox Christians peculiarly anxious to
recognize Christ's deity.
</p>

<p>
<q>There is no <q>corner</q> in divine grace</q> (C. H. Parkhurst). <q>All notions of a needed
<q>priesthood,</q> to bring us into connection with Christ, must yield to the truth that
Christ is ever with us</q> (E. G. Robinson). <q>The priest was the conservative, the prophet
the progressive. Hence the conflict between them. Episcopalians like the idea
of a priesthood, but do not know what to do with that of prophet.</q> Dr. A. J. Gordon:
<q>Ritualism, like eczema in the human body, is generally a symptom of a low state of
the blood. As a rule, when the church becomes secularized, it becomes ritualized, while
great revivals, pouring through the church, have almost always burst the liturgical
bands and have restored it to the freedom of the Spirit.</q>
</p>

<p>
Puseyism, as defined by Pusey himself, means: <q>1. high thoughts of the two sacraments;
2. high estimate of Episcopacy as God's ordinance; 3. high estimate of the
visible church as the body wherein we are made and continue to be members of
Christ; 4. regard for ordinances as directing our devotions and disciplining us, such as
daily public prayers, fasts and feasts; 5. regard for the visible part of devotion, such
as the decoration of the house of God, which acts insensibly on the mind; 6. reverence
for and deference to the ancient church, instead of the reformers, as the ultimate
expounder of the meaning of our church.</q> Pusey declared that he and Maurice worshiped
different Gods.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>5. Prerequisites to Participation in the Lord's Supper.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. There are prerequisites.</head>

<p>
This we argue from the fact:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That Christ enjoined the celebration of the Supper, not upon the
world at large, but only upon his disciples; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) that the apostolic injunctions
to Christians, to separate themselves from certain of their number,
imply a limitation of the Lord's Supper to a narrower body, even among
professed believers; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) that the analogy of Baptism, as belonging only to
a specified class of persons, leads us to believe that the same is true of the
Lord's Supper.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The analogy of Baptism to the Lord's Supper suggests a general survey of the connections
between the two ordinances: 1. Both ordinances symbolize primarily the
death of Christ; then secondarily our spiritual death to sin because we are one with
him; it being absurd, where there is no such union, to make our Baptism the symbol
of his death. 2. We are merged in Christ first in Baptism; then in the Supper Christ
is more and more taken into us; Baptism = we in Christ, the Supper = Christ in us.
<pb n='970'/><anchor id='Pg970'/>
3. As regeneration is instantaneous and sanctification continues in time, so Baptism
should be for once, the Lord's Supper often; the first single, the second frequent. 4. If
one ordinance, the Supper, requires discernment of the Lord's body, so does the other,
the ordinance of Baptism; the subject of Baptism should know the meaning of his act.
5. The order of the ordinances teaches Christian doctrine, as the ordinances do; to
partake of the Lord's Supper before being baptized is to say in symbol that one can be
sanctified without being regenerated. 6. Both ordinances should be public, as both
<q>show forth</q> the Lord's death and are teaching ordinances; no celebration of either
one is to be permitted in private. 7. In both the administrator does not act at his own
option, but is the organ of the church; Philip acts as organ of the church at Jerusalem
when he baptizes the eunuch. 8. The ordinances stand by themselves, and are not to
be made appendages of other meetings or celebrations; they belong, not to associations
or conventions, but to the local church. 9. The Lord's Supper needs scrutiny of the
communicant's qualifications as much as Baptism; and only the local church is the
proper judge of these qualifications. 10. We may deny the Lord's Supper to one whom
we know to be a Christian, when he walks disorderly or disseminates false doctrine,
just as we may deny Baptism to such a person. 11. Fencing the tables, or warning the
unqualified not to partake of the Supper, may, like instruction with regard to Baptism,
best take place before the actual administration of the ordinance; and the pastor is
not a special policeman or detective to ferret out offences. See Expositor's Greek
Testament on <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:1-6</hi>.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. The prerequisites are those only which are expressly or implicitly
laid down by Christ and his apostles.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The church, as possessing executive but not legislative power, is
charged with the duty, not of framing rules for the administering and
guarding of the ordinance, but of discovering and applying the rules given
it in the New Testament. No church has a right to establish any terms of
communion; it is responsible only for making known the terms established
by Christ and his apostles. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) These terms, however, are to be ascertained
not only from the injunctions, but also from the precedents, of the
New Testament. Since the apostles were inspired, New Testament precedent
is the <q>common law</q> of the church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
English law consists mainly of precedent, that is, past decisions of the courts. Immemorial
customs may be as binding as are the formal enactments of a legislature. It is
New Testament precedent that makes obligatory the observance of the first day,
instead of the seventh day, of the week. The common law of the church consists,
however, not of any and all customs, but only of the customs of the apostolic church
interpreted in the light of its principles, or the customs universally binding because
sanctioned by inspired apostles. Has New Testament precedent the authority of a
divine command? Only so far, we reply, as it is an adequate, complete and final
expression of the divine life in Christ. This we claim for the ordinances of Baptism
and of the Lord's Supper, and for the order of these ordinances. See Proceedings of
the Baptist Congress, 1896:23.
</p>

<p>
The Mennonites, thinking to reproduce even the incidental phases of N. T. action,
have adopted: 1. the washing of feet; 2. the marriage only of members of the same
faith; 3. non-resistance to violence; 4. the use of the ban, and the shunning of
expelled persons; 5. refusal to take oaths; 6. the kiss of peace; 7. formal examination
of the spiritual condition of each communicant before his participation in the Lord's
Supper; 8. the choice of officials by lot. And they naturally break up into twelve
sects, dividing upon such points as holding all things in common; plainness of dress,
one sect repudiating buttons and using only hooks upon their clothing, whence their
nickname of Hookers; the holding of services in private houses only; the asserted
possession of the gift of prophecy (A. S. Carman).
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>C. On examining the New Testament, we find that the prerequisites to
participation in the Lord's Supper are four.</head>

<pb n='971'/><anchor id='Pg971'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>First,&mdash;Regeneration.</head>

<p>
The Lord's Supper is the outward expression of a life in the believer,
nourished and sustained by the life of Christ. It cannot therefore be partaken
of by one who is <q>dead through ... trespasses and sins.</q> We
give no food to a corpse. The Lord's Supper was never offered by the
apostles to unbelievers. On the contrary, the injunction that each communicant
<q>examine himself</q> implies that faith which will enable the communicant
to <q>discern the Lord's body</q> is a prerequisite to participation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:27-29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Wherefore whosoever shall eat the bread or drink the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner,
shall be guilty of the body and the blood of the Lord. But let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of the bread, and
drink of the cup. For he that eateth and drinketh, eateth and drinketh judgment unto himself, if he discern not the
Lord's body.</hi></q> Schaff, in his Church History, 2:517, tells us that in the Greek Church, in the
seventh and eighth centuries, the bread was dipped in the wine, and both elements
were delivered in a spoon. See Edwards, on Qualifications for Full Communion, in
Works, 1:81.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Secondly,&mdash;Baptism.</head>

<p>
In proof that baptism is a prerequisite to the Lord's Supper, we urge
the following considerations:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The ordinance of baptism was instituted and administered long
before the Supper.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 21:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven or from men?</hi></q>&mdash;Christ here intimates
that John's baptism had been instituted by God before his own.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The apostles who first celebrated it had, in all probability, been
baptized.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 1:21, 22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Of the men therefore that have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and went
out among us, beginning from the baptism of John ... of these must one become a witness with us of his resurrection</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>19:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>John baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe on him
that should come after him, that is, on Jesus.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Several of the apostles were certainly disciples of John. If Christ was baptized,
much more his disciples. Jesus recognized John's baptism as obligatory, and it is not
probable that he would take his apostles from among those who had not submitted to
it. John the Baptist himself, the first administrator of baptism, must have been himself
unbaptized. But the twelve could fitly administer it, because they had themselves
received it at John's hands. See Arnold, Terms of Communion, 17.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The command of Christ fixes the place of baptism as first in order
after discipleship.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:19, 20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Go ye therefore, and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I commanded you</hi></q>&mdash;here
the first duty is to make disciples, the second to baptize, the third to instruct in right
Christian living. Is it said that there is no formal command to admit only baptized
persons to the Lord's Supper? We reply that there is no formal command to admit
only regenerate persons to baptism. In both cases, the practice of the apostles and the
general connections of Christian doctrine are sufficient to determine our duty.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) All the recorded cases show this to have been the order observed by
the first Christians and sanctioned by the apostles.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:41, 46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>They then that received his word were baptized.... And day by day, continuing stedfastly with
one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home</hi> [rather, <q><hi rend='italic'>in various worship-rooms</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>they took their food
with gladness and singleness of heart</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>8:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But when they believed Philip ... they were baptized</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>10:47,
48</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Can any man forbid the water, that these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Spirit as well
as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>22:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And now why tarriest thou?
arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on his name.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The symbolism of the ordinances requires that baptism should precede
the Lord's Supper. The order of the facts signified must be expressed
<pb n='972'/><anchor id='Pg972'/>
in the order of the ordinances which signify them; else the world is
taught that sanctification may take place without regeneration. Birth must
come before sustenance&mdash;<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nascimur</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pascimur</foreign>.</q> To enjoy ceremonial
privileges, there must be ceremonial qualifications. As none but the
circumcised could eat the passover, so before eating with the Christian
family must come adoption into the Christian family.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As one must be <q><emph>born of the Spirit</emph></q> before he can experience the sustaining influence of
Christ, so he must be <q><emph>born of water</emph></q> before he can properly be nourished by the Lord's
Supper. Neither the unborn nor the dead can eat bread or drink wine. Only when
Christ had raised the daughter of the Jewish ruler to life, did he say: <q><hi rend='italic'>Give her to eat</hi>.</q>
The ordinance which symbolizes regeneration, or the impartation of new life, must precede
the ordinance which symbolizes the strengthening and perfecting of the life
already begun. The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, dating back to the second half
of the second century, distinctly declares (9:5, 10)&mdash;<q>Let no one eat or drink of your
Eucharist except those baptized into the name of the Lord; for as regards this also the
Lord has said: <q>Give not that which is holy unto the dogs</q>.... The Eucharist shall
be given only to the baptized.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) The standards of all evangelical denominations, with unimportant
exceptions, confirm the view that this is the natural interpretation of the
Scripture requirements respecting the order of the ordinances.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The only protest of note has been made by a portion of the English Baptists.</q> To
these should be added the comparatively small body of the Free Will Baptists in
America. Pedobaptist churches in general refuse full membership, office-holding,
and the ministry, to unbaptized persons. The Presbyterian church does not admit to
the communion members of the Society of Friends. Not one of the great evangelical
denominations accepts Robert Hall's maxim that the only terms of communion are
terms of salvation. If individual ministers announce this principle and conform their
practice to it, it is only because they transgress the standards of the churches to which
they belong.
</p>

<p>
See Tyerman's Oxford Methodists, preface, page vi&mdash;<q>Even in Georgia, Wesley
excluded dissenters from the Holy Communion, on the ground that they had not been
properly baptized; and he would himself baptize only by immersion, unless the child or
person was in a weak state of health.</q> Baptist Noel gave it as his reason for submitting
to baptism, that to approach the Lord's Supper conscious of not being baptized
would be to act contrary to all the precedents of Scripture. See Curtis, Progress of
Baptist Principles, 304.
</p>

<p>
The dismission of Jonathan Edwards from his church at Northampton was due to his
opposing the Halfway Covenant, which admitted unregenerate persons to the Lord's
Supper as a step on the road to spiritual life. He objected to the doctrine that the
Lord's Supper was <q>a converting ordinance.</q> But these very unregenerated persons
had been baptized, and he himself had baptized many of them. He should have
objected to infant baptism, as well as to the Lord's Supper, in the case of the unregenerate.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) The practical results of the opposite view are convincing proof
that the order here insisted on is the order of nature as well as of Scripture.
The admission of unbaptized persons to the communion tends always to,
and has frequently resulted in, the disuse of baptism itself, the obscuring
of the truth which it symbolizes, the transformation of Scripturally constituted
churches into bodies organized after methods of human invention,
and the complete destruction of both church and ordinances as Christ
originally constituted them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Arnold, Terms of Communion, 76&mdash;The steps of departure from Scriptural precedent
have not unfrequently been the following: (1) administration of baptism on a weekday
evening, to avoid giving offence; (2) reception, without baptism, of persons
renouncing belief in the baptism of their infancy; (3) giving up of the Lord's Supper as
<pb n='973'/><anchor id='Pg973'/>
non-essential,&mdash;to be observed or not observed by each individual, according as he
finds it useful; (4) choice of a pastor who will not advocate Baptist views; (5) adoption
of Congregational articles of faith; (6) discipline and exclusion of members for
propagating Baptist doctrine. John Bunyan's church, once either an open communion
church or a mixed church both of baptized and unbaptized believers, is now a regular
Congregational body. Armitage, History of the Baptists, 482 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, claims that it was
originally a Baptist church. Vedder, however, in Bap. Quar. Rev., 1886:289, says that
<q>The church at Bedford is proved by indisputable documentary evidence never to
have been a Baptist church in any strict sense.</q> The results of the principle of open
communion are certainly seen in the Regent's Park church in London, where some of
the deacons have never been baptized. The doctrine that baptism is not essential to
church membership is simply the logical result of the previous practice of admitting
unbaptized persons to the communion table. If they are admitted to the Lord's
Supper, then there is no bar to their admission to the church. See Proceedings of the
Baptist Congress, Boston, November, 1902; Curtis, Progress of Baptist Principles,
296-298.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Thirdly,&mdash;Church membership.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The Lord's Supper is a church ordinance, observed by churches of
Christ as such. For this reason, membership in the church naturally precedes
communion. Since communion is a family rite, the participant
should first be a member of the family.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 2:46 47</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>breaking bread at home</hi> [rather, <q><hi rend='italic'>in various worship-rooms</hi></q>]</q> (see Com. of Meyer);
<hi rend='italic'>20:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>upon the first day of the week, when we were gathered together to break bread</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:18, 22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when ye
come together in the church ... have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the church of God, and put
them to shame that have not?</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The Lord's Supper is a symbol of church fellowship. Excommunication
implies nothing, if it does not imply exclusion from the communion.
If the Supper is simply communion of the individual with Christ,
then the church has no right to exclude any from it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>we, who are many, are one bread, one body: for we all partake of the one bread.</hi></q> Though the
Lord's Supper primarily symbolizes fellowship with Christ, it symbolizes secondarily
fellowship with the church of Christ. Not all believers in Christ were present at the
first celebration of the Supper, but only those organized into a body&mdash;the apostles. I
can invite proper persons to my tea-table, but that does not give them the right to come
uninvited. Each church, therefore, should invite visiting members of sister churches
to partake with it. The Lord's Supper is an ordinance by itself, and should not be
celebrated at conventions and associations, simply to lend dignity to something else.
</p>

<p>
The Panpresbyterian Council at Philadelphia, in 1880, refused to observe the Lord's
Supper together, upon the ground that the Supper is a church ordinance, to be observed
only by those who are amenable to the discipline of the body, and therefore not to be
observed by separate church organizations acting together. Substantially upon this
ground, the Old School General Assembly long before, being invited to unite at the
Lord's table with the New School body with whom they had dissolved ecclesiastical
relations, declined to do so. See Curtis, Progress of Baptist Principles, 304; Arnold,
Terms of Communion, 36.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fourthly,&mdash;An orderly walk.</head>

<p>
Disorderly walking designates a course of life in a church member which
is contrary to the precepts of the gospel. It is a bar to participation in the
Lord's Supper, the sign of church fellowship. With Arnold, we may class
disorderly walking under four heads:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Immoral conduct.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 5:1-13</hi>&mdash;Paul commands the Corinthian church to exclude the incestuous person:
<q><hi rend='italic'>I wrote unto you in my epistle to have no company with fornicators;... but now I write unto you not to keep
company, if any man that is named a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a reviler, or a drunkard, or
<pb n='974'/><anchor id='Pg974'/>
an extortioner; with such a one no, not to eat.... Put away the wicked man from among yourselves.</hi></q>&mdash;Here it
is evident that the most serious forms of disorderly walking require exclusion not only
from church fellowship but from Christian fellowship as well.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Disobedience to the commands of Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 14:37</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If any man thinketh himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him take knowledge of the things
which I write unto you, that they are the commandments of the Lord</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 3:6, 11, 15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now we command you,
brethren,... that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition
which they received of us... For we hear of some that walk among you disorderly, that work not at all, but are
busybodies.... And if any man obeyeth not our word by this epistle, note that man, that ye have no company with
him, to the end that he may be ashamed. And yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.</hi></q>&mdash;Here
is exclusion from church fellowship, and from the Lord's Supper its sign, while yet the
offender is not excluded from Christian fellowship, but is still counted <q><hi rend='italic'>a brother</hi>.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> G. B. Stevens, in N. Englander, 1887:40-47.
</p>

<p>
In these passages Paul intimates that <q>not to walk after the tradition received from
him, not to obey the word contained in his epistles, is the same as disobedience to the
commands of Christ, and as such involves the forfeiture of church fellowship and its
privileged tokens</q> (Arnold, Prerequisites to Communion, 68). Since Baptism is a
command of Christ, it follows that we cannot properly commune with the unbaptized.
To admit such to the Lord's Supper is to give the symbol of church fellowship to those
who, in spite of the fact that they are Christian brethren, are, though perhaps unconsciously,
violating the fundamental law of the church. To withhold protest against
plain disobedience to Christ's commands is to that extent to countenance such disobedience.
The same disobedience which in the church member we should denominate
disorderly walking must <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a fortiori</foreign> destroy all right to the Lord's Supper on the part of
those who are not members of the church.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Heresy, or the holding and teaching of false doctrine.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Titus 3:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>A man that is heretical</hi> [Am. Revisers: <q><hi rend='italic'>a factious man</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>after a first and second admonition
refuse</hi></q>; see Ellicott, Com., <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>: <q>αἱρετικὸς ἄνθρωπος = one who gives rise to divisions by
erroneous teaching, not necessarily of a fundamentally heterodox nature, but of the
kind just described in <hi rend='italic'>verse 9</hi>.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>from among your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away the disciples after them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 4:2, 3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: every
spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: and every spirit that confesseth not Jesus is not
of God: and this is the spirit of the antichrist.</hi></q> B. B. Bosworth: <q>Heresy, in the N. T., does not
necessarily mean the holding of erroneous opinions,&mdash;it may also mean the holding of
correct opinions in an unbrotherly or divisive spirit.</q> We grant that the word <q><emph>heretical</emph></q>
may also mean <q><emph>factious</emph></q>; but we claim that false doctrine is the chief source of division,
and is therefore in itself a disqualification for participation in the Lord's Supper.
Factiousness is an additional bar, and we treat it under the next head of Schism.
</p>

<p>
The Panpresbyterian Council, mentioned above, refused to admit to their body the
Cumberland Presbyterians, because, though the latter adhere to the Presbyterian form
of church government, they are Arminian in their views of the doctrines of grace. As
we have seen, on pages <ref target='Pg940'>940-942</ref>, that Baptism is a confession of evangelical faith, so
here we see that the Lord's Supper also is a confession of evangelical faith, and that no
one can properly participate in it who denies the doctrines of sin, of the deity, incarnation
and atonement of Christ, and of justification by faith, which the Lord's Supper
symbolizes. Such denial should exclude from all Christian fellowship as well.
</p>

<p>
There is heresy which involves exclusion only from church fellowship. Since pedobaptists
hold and propagate false doctrine with regard to the church and its ordinances&mdash;doctrines
which endanger the spirituality of the church, the sufficiency of the
Scriptures, and the lordship of Christ&mdash;we cannot properly admit them to the Lord's
Supper. To admit them or to partake with them, would be to treat falsehood as if it
were truth. Arnold, Prerequisites to Communion, 72&mdash;<q>Pedobaptists are guilty of
teaching that the baptized are not members of the church, or that membership in the
church is not voluntary; that there are two sorts of baptism, one of which is a profession
of faith of the person baptized, and the other is profession of faith of another person;
that regeneration is given in and by baptism, or that the church is composed in
great part of persons who do not give, and were never supposed to give, any evidence
of regeneration; that the church has a right to change essentially one of Christ's institutions,
or that it is unessential whether it be observed as he ordained it or in some
other manner; that baptism may be rightfully administered in a way which makes
<pb n='975'/><anchor id='Pg975'/>
much of the language in which it is described in the Scriptures wholly unsuitable and
inapplicable, and which does not at all represent the facts and doctrines which baptism
is declared in the Scriptures to represent; that the Scriptures are not in all religious
matters the sufficient and only binding rule of faith and practice.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Schism, or the promotion of division and dissension in the church.&mdash;This
also requires exclusion from church fellowship, and from the Lord's
Supper which is its appointed sign.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 16:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them that are causing the divisions and occasions of stumbling
contrary to the doctrine which ye learned: and turn away from them.</hi></q> Since pedobaptists, by their
teaching and practice, draw many away from Scripturally constituted churches,&mdash;thus
dividing true believers from each other and weakening the bodies organized after the
model of the New Testament,&mdash;it is imperative upon us to separate ourselves from them,
so far as regards that communion at the Lord's table which is the sign of church fellowship.
Mr. Spurgeon admits pedobaptists to commune with his church <q>for two or
three months.</q> Then they are kindly asked whether they are pleased with the church,
its preaching, doctrine, form of government, <hi rend='italic'>etc.</hi> If they say they are pleased, they
are asked if they are not disposed to be baptized and become members? If so inclined,
all is well; but if not, they are kindly told that it is not desirable for them to commune
longer. Thus baptism is held to precede church membership and permanent communion,
although temporary communion is permitted without it.
</p>

<p>
Arnold, Prerequisites to Communion, 80&mdash;<q>It may perhaps be objected that the passages
cited under the four preceding subdivisions refer to church fellowship in a
general way, without any specific reference to the Lord's Supper. In reply to this objection,
I would answer, in the first place, that having endeavored previously to establish
the position that the Lord's Supper is an ordinance to be celebrated in the church,
and expressive of church fellowship, I felt at liberty to use the passages that enjoin the
withdrawal of that fellowship as constructively enjoining exclusion from the Communion,
which is its chief token. I answer, secondly, that the principle here assumed seems
to me to pervade the Scriptural teachings so thoroughly that it is next to impossible to
lay down <emph>any</emph> Scriptural terms of communion at the Lord's table, except upon the
admission that the ordinance is inseparably connected with church fellowship. To treat
the subject otherwise, would be, as it appears to me, a violent putting asunder of what
the Lord has joined together. The objection suggests an additional argument in favor
of our position that the Lord's Supper is a <emph>church</emph> ordinance.</q> <q>Who Christ's body
doth divide, Wounds afresh the Crucified; Who Christ's people doth perplex, Weakens
faith and comfort wrecks; Who Christ's order doth not see, Works in vain for unity;
Who Christ's word doth take for guide, With the Bridegroom loves the Bride.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>D. The local church is the judge whether these prerequisites are fulfilled.</head>

<p>
The local church is the judge whether these prerequisites are fulfilled
in the case of persons desiring to partake of the Lord's Supper.&mdash;This
is evident from the following considerations:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The command to observe the ordinance was given, not to individuals,
but to a company.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Obedience to this command is not an individual act, but is the joint
act of many.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The regular observance of the Lord's Supper cannot be secured,
nor the qualifications of persons desiring to participate in it be scrutinized,
unless some distinct organized body is charged with this responsibility.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The only organized body known to the New Testament is the local
church, and this is the only body, of any sort, competent to have charge of
the ordinances. The invisible church has no officers.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The New Testament accounts indicate that the Lord's Supper was
observed only at regular appointed meetings of local churches, and was
observed by these churches as regularly organized bodies.
</p>

<pb n='976'/><anchor id='Pg976'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) Since the duty of examining the qualifications of candidates for
baptism and for membership is vested in the local church and is essential
to its distinct existence, the analogy of the ordinances would lead us to
believe that the scrutiny of qualifications for participation in the Lord's
Supper rests with the same body.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) This care that only proper persons are admitted to the ordinances
should be shown, not by open or forcible debarring of the unworthy at the
time of the celebration, but by previous public instruction of the congregation,
and, if needful in the case of persistent offenders, by subsequent
private and friendly admonition.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>What is everybody's business is nobody's business.</q> If there be any power of
effective scrutiny, it must be lodged in the local church. The minister is not to administer
the ordinance of the Lord's Supper at his own option, any more than the ordinance
of Baptism. He is simply the organ of the church. He is to follow the rules of the
church as to invitations and as to the mode of celebrating the ordinance, of course
instructing the church as to the order of the New Testament. In the case of sick members
who desire to communicate, brethren may be deputed to hold a special meeting of
the church at the private house or sick room, and then only may the pastor officiate.
If an invitation to the Communion is given, it may well be in the following form:
<q>Members in good standing of other churches of like faith and practice are cordially
invited to partake with us.</q> But since the comity of Baptist churches is universally
acknowledged, and since Baptist views with regard to the ordinances are so generally
understood, it should be taken for granted that all proper persons will be welcome even
if no invitation of any sort is given.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Spurgeon, as we have seen, permitted unbaptized persons temporarily to partake
of the Lord's Supper unchallenged, but if there appeared a disposition to make participation
habitual, one of the deacons in a private interview explained Baptist doctrine
and urged the duty of baptism. If this advice was not taken, participation in the Lord's
Supper naturally ceased. Dr. P. S. Henson proposes a middle path between open and
close communion, as follows: <q>Preach and urge faith in Jesus and obedience to him.
Leave choice with participants themselves. It is not wise to set up a judgment-seat at
the Lord's table. Always preach the Scriptural order&mdash;1. Faith in Jesus; 2. Obedience
in Baptism; 2. Observance of the Lord's Supper.</q> J. B. Thomas: <q>Objections
to strict communion come with an ill grace from pedobaptists who withhold communion
from their own baptized, whom they have forcibly made quasi-members in spite of
the only protest they are capable of offering, and whom they have retained as subjects
of discipline without their consent.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. H. Strong, Cleveland Sermon on Our Denominational Outlook, May 19, 1904&mdash;<q rend='pre'>If
I am asked whether Baptists still hold to restricted communion, I answer that our
principle has not changed, but that many of us apply the principle in a different manner
from that of our fathers. We believe that Baptism logically precedes the Lord's
Supper, as birth precedes the taking of nourishment, and regeneration precedes sanctification.
We believe that the order of the ordinances is an important point of
Christian doctrine, and itself teaches Christian doctrine. Hence we proclaim it and
adhere to it, in our preaching and our practice. But we do not turn the Lord's Supper
into a judgment-seat, or turn the officers of the church into detectives. We teach the
truth, and expect that the truth will win its way. We are courteous to all who come
among us; and expect that they in turn will have the courtesy to respect our convictions
and to act accordingly. But there is danger here that we may break from our
moorings and drift into indifferentism with regard to the ordinances. The recent
advocacy of open church-membership is but the logical consequence of a previous concession
of open communion. I am persuaded that this new doctrine is confined to very
few among us. The remedy for this false liberalism is to be found in that same Christ
who solves for us all other problems. It is this Christ who sets the solitary in families,
and who makes of one every nation that dwells on the face of the earth. Christian
denominations are at least temporarily his appointment. Loyalty to the body which
seems to us best to represent his truth is also loyalty to him. Love for Christ does not
involve the surrender of the ties of family, or nation, or denomination, but only
consecrates and ennobles them.</q>
</p>

<pb n='977'/><anchor id='Pg977'/>

<p>
<q>Yet Christ is King in Zion. There is but one army of the living God, even though
there are many divisions. We can emphasize our unity with other Christian bodies,
rather than the differences between us. We can regard them as churches of the Lord
Jesus, even though they are irregularly constituted. As a marriage ceremony may be
valid, even though performed without a license and by an unqualified administrator;
and as an ordination may be valid, even though the ordinary laying-on of hands be omitted;
so the ordinance of the Lord's Supper as administered in pedobaptist churches
may be valid, though irregular in its accompaniments and antecedents. Though we
still protest against the modern perversions of the New Testament doctrine as to the
subjects and mode of Baptism, we hold with regard to the Lord's Supper that irregularity
is not invalidity, and that we may recognize as churches even those bodies
which celebrate the Lord's Supper without having been baptized. Our faith in the
larger Christ is bringing us out from our denominational isolation into an inspiring
recognition of our oneness with the universal church of God throughout the world.</q>
On the whole subject, see Madison Avenue Lectures, 217-260; and A. H. Strong, on
Christian Truth and its Keepers, in Philosophy and Religion, 238-244.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>E. Special objections to open communion.</head>

<p>
The advocates of this view claim that baptism, as not being an indispensable
term of salvation, cannot properly be made an indispensable term of
communion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Robert Hall, Works, 1:285, held that there can be no proper terms of communion
which are not also terms of salvation. He claims that <q>we are expressly commanded
to tolerate in the church all those diversities of opinion which are not inconsistent with
salvation.</q> For the open communion view, see also John M. Mason, Works, 1:369;
Princeton Review, Oct. 1850; Bib. Sac., 21:449; 24:482; 25:401; Spirit of the Pilgrims,
6:103, 142. But, as Curtis remarks, in his Progress of Baptist Principles, 292, this principle
would utterly frustrate the very objects for which visible churches were founded&mdash;to
be <q><hi rend='italic'>the pillar and ground of the truth</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 3:15</hi>); for truth is set forth as forcibly in
ordinances as in doctrine.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In addition to what has already been said, we reply:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) This view is contrary to the belief and practice of all but an insignificant
fragment of organized Christendom.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A portion of the English Baptists, and the Free Will Baptists in America, are the only
bodies which in their standards of faith accept and maintain the principles of open
communion. As to the belief and practice of the Methodist Episcopal denomination,
the New York Christian Advocate states the terms of communion as being: 1. Discipleship;
2. Baptism; 3. Consistent church life, as required in the <q>Discipline</q>; and F. G.
Hibbard, Christian Baptism, 174, remarks that, <q>in one principle the Baptist and pedobaptist
churches agree. They both agree in rejecting from the communion at the table
of the Lord, and denying the rights of church fellowship to all who have not been baptized.
Valid baptism, they consider, is essential to constitute visible church membership.
This also we [Methodists] hold.... The charge of close communion is no
more applicable to the Baptists than to us.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Interior states the Presbyterian position as follows: <q>The difference between
our Baptist brethren and ourselves is an important difference. We agree with them,
however, in saying that unbaptized persons should not partake of the Lord's Supper.
Close communion, in our judgment, is a more defensible position than open communion.</q>
Dr. John Hall: <q>If I believed, with the Baptists, that none are baptized
but those who are immersed on profession of faith, I should, with them, refuse to commune
with any others.</q>
</p>

<p>
As to the views of Congregationalists, we quote from Dwight, Systematic Theology,
sermon 160&mdash;<q>It is an indispensable qualification for this ordinance that the candidate
for communion be a member of the visible church of Christ, in full standing. By
this I intend that he should be a man of piety; that he should have made a public profession
of religion; and that he should have been baptized.</q> The Independent: <q>We
have never been disposed to charge the Baptist church with any special narrowness or
bigotry in their rule of admission to the Lord's table. We do not see how it differs
from that commonly admitted and established among Presbyterian churches.</q>
</p>

<pb n='978'/><anchor id='Pg978'/>

<p>
The Episcopal standards and authorities are equally plain. The Book of Common
Prayer, Order of Confirmation, declares: <q>There shall none be admitted to the holy
communion, until such time as he be confirmed, or be ready and desirous to be confirmed</q>&mdash;confirmation
always coming after baptism. Wall, History of Infant Baptism,
part 2, chapter 9&mdash;<q>No church ever gave the communion to any persons before
they were baptized. Among all the absurdities that ever were held, none ever maintained
that any person should partake of the communion before he was baptized.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It assumes an unscriptural inequality between the two ordinances.
The Lord's Supper holds no higher rank in Scripture than does Baptism.
The obligation to commune is no more binding than the obligation to profess
faith by being baptized. Open communion, however, treats baptism
as if it were optional, while it insists upon communion as indispensable.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Robert Hall should rather have said: <q>No church has a right to establish terms of baptism
which are not also terms of salvation,</q> for baptism is most frequently in Scripture
connected with the things that accompany salvation. We believe faith to be one prerequisite,
but not the only one. We may hold a person to be a Christian, without
thinking him entitled to commune unless he has been also baptized.
</p>

<p>
Ezra's reform in abolishing mixed marriages with the surrounding heathen was not
narrow nor bigoted nor intolerant. Miss Willard said well that from the Gerizim of
holy beatitudes there comes a voice: <q>Blessed are the inclusive, for they shall be
included,</q> and from Mount Ebal a voice, saying: <q>Sad are the exclusive, for they
shall be excluded.</q> True liberality is both Christian and wise. We should be just as
liberal as Christ himself, and no more so. Even Miss Willard would not include rum-sellers
in the Christian Temperance Union, nor think that town blessed that did not say
to saloon keepers: <q>Repent, or go.</q> The choir is not narrow because it does not
include those who can only make discords, nor is the sheepfold intolerant that refuses
to include wolves, nor the medical society that excludes quacks, nor the church that
does not invite the disobedient and schismatic to its communion.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It tends to do away with baptism altogether. If the highest privilege
of church membership may be enjoyed without baptism, baptism loses
its place and importance as the initiatory ordinance of the church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Robert Hall would admit to the Lord's Supper those who deny Baptism to be perpetually
binding on the church. A foreigner may love this country, but he cannot vote at
our elections unless he has been naturalized. Ceremonial rites imply ceremonial qualifications.
Dr. Meredith in Brooklyn said to his great Bible Class that a man, though
not a Christian, but who felt himself a sinner and needing Christ, could worthily partake
of the Lord's Supper. This is the logic of open communion. The Supper is not
limited to baptized persons, nor to church members, nor even to converted people, but
belongs also to the unconverted world. This is not only to do away with Baptism, but
to make the Lord's Supper a converting ordinance.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) It tends to do away with all discipline. When Christians offend,
the church must withdraw its fellowship from them. But upon the principle
of open communion, such withdrawal is impossible, since the Lord's
Supper, the highest expression of church fellowship, is open to every
person who regards himself as a Christian.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
H. F. Colby: <q>Ought we to acknowledge that evangelical pedobaptists are qualified
to partake of the Lord's Supper? We are ready to admit them on precisely the same
terms on which we admit ourselves. Our communion bars come to be a protest, but
from no plan of ours. They become a protest merely as every act of loyalty to truth
becomes a protest against error.</q> Constitutions of the Holy Apostles, book 2, section
7 (about 250 A. D.)&mdash;<q>But if they [those who have been convicted of wickedness]
afterwards repent and turn from their error, then we receive them as we receive the
heathen, when they wish to repent, into the church indeed to hear the word, but do not
receive them to communion until they have received the seal of baptism and are made
complete Christians.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='979'/><anchor id='Pg979'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) It tends to do away with the visible church altogether. For no
visible church is possible, unless some sign of membership be required, in
addition to the signs of membership in the invisible church. Open communion
logically leads to open church membership, and a church membership
open to all, without reference to the qualifications required in
Scripture, or without examination on the part of the church as to the
existence of these qualifications in those who unite with it, is virtually
an identification of the church with the world, and, without protest from
Scripturally constituted bodies, would finally result in its actual extinction.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Dr. Walcott Calkins, in Andover Review: <q>It has never been denied that the Puritan
way of maintaining the purity and doctrinal soundness of the churches is to secure
a soundly converted membership. There is one denomination of Puritans which has
never deviated a hair's breadth from this way. The Baptists have always insisted that
regenerate persons only ought to receive the sacraments of the church. And they have
depended absolutely upon this provision for the purity and doctrinal soundness of
their churches.</q>
</p>

<p>
At the Free Will Baptist Convention at Providence, Oct., 1874, the question came up
of admitting pedobaptists to membership. This was disposed of by resolving that
<q>Christian baptism is a personal act of public consecration to Christ, and that believers'
baptism and immersion alone, as baptism, are fundamental principles of the denomination.</q>
In other words, unimmersed believers would not be admitted to membership.
But is it not the Lord's church? Have we a right to exclude? Is this not bigotry?
The Free Will Baptist answers: <q>No, it is only loyalty to truth.</q>
</p>

<p>
We claim that, upon the same principle, he should go further, and refuse to admit to
the communion those whom he refuses to admit to church membership. The reasons
assigned for acting upon the opposite principle are sentimental rather than rational.
See John Stuart Mill's definition of sentimentality, quoted in Martineau's Essays,
1:94&mdash;<q>Sentimentality consists in setting the sympathetic aspect of things, or their
loveableness, above their æsthetic aspect, their beauty; or above the moral aspect of
them, their right or wrong.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Objections to Strict Communion, and Answers to them</hi> (condensed from
Arnold, Terms of Communion, 82):
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>1st. <hi rend='italic'>Primitive rules are not applicable now.</hi> Reply: (1) The laws of Christ are
unchangeable. (2) The primitive order ought to be restored.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>2d. <hi rend='italic'>Baptism, as an external rite, is of less importance than love.</hi> Reply: (1) It is
not inconsistent with love, but the mark of love, to keep Christ's commandments.
(2) Love for our brethren requires protest against their errors.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>3d. <hi rend='italic'>Pedobaptists think themselves baptized.</hi> Reply: (1) This is a reason why they
should act as if they believed it, not a reason why we should act as if it were so. (2)
We cannot submit our consciences to their views of truth without harming ourselves
and them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>4th. <hi rend='italic'>Strict communion is a hindrance to union among Christians.</hi> Reply: (1) Christ
desires only union in the truth. (2) Baptists are not responsible for the separation.
(3) Mixed communion is not a cure but a cause of disunion.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>5th. <hi rend='italic'>The rule excludes from the communion baptized members of pedobaptist churches.</hi>
Reply: (1) These persons are walking disorderly, in promoting error. (2) The Lord's
Supper is a symbol of church fellowship, not of fellowship for individuals, apart from
their church relations.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>6th. <hi rend='italic'>A plea for dispensing with the rule exists in extreme cases where persons must
commune with us or not at all.</hi> Reply: (1) It is hard to fix limits to these exceptions:
they would be likely to encroach more and more, till the rule became merely nominal.
(2) It is a greater privilege and means of grace, in such circumstances, to abstain from
communing, than contrary to principle to participate. (3) It is not right to participate
with others, where we cannot invite them reciprocally.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>7. <hi rend='italic'>Alleged inconsistency of our practice.</hi>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Since we expect to commune in
heaven. Reply: This confounds Christian fellowship with church fellowship. We do
commune with pedobaptists spiritually, here as hereafter. We do not expect to partake
of the Lord's Supper with them, or with others, in heaven. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Since we reject
the better and receive the worse. Reply: We are not at liberty to refuse to apply
Christ's outward rule, because we cannot equally apply his inward spiritual rule of
<pb n='980'/><anchor id='Pg980'/>
character. Pedobaptists withhold communion from those they regard as unbaptized,
though they may be more spiritual than some in the church. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Since we recognize
pedobaptists as brethren in union meetings, exchange of pulpits, <hi rend='italic'>etc.</hi> Reply: None
of these acts of fraternal fellowship imply the church communion which admission to
the Lord's table would imply. This last would recognize them as baptized: the former
do not.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>8th. <hi rend='italic'>Alleged impolicy of our practice.</hi> Reply: (1) This consideration would be pertinent,
only if we were at liberty to change our practice when it was expedient, or was
thought to be so. (2) Any particular truth will inspire respect in others in proportion
as its advocates show that they respect it. In England our numbers have diminished,
compared with the population, in the ratio of 33 per cent; here we have increased 50
per cent. in proportion to the ratio of population.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Summary.</hi> Open communion must be justified, if at all, on one of four grounds:
First, that baptism is not prerequisite to communion. But this is opposed to the belief
and practice of all churches. Secondly, that immersion on profession of faith is not
essential to baptism. But this is renouncing Baptist principles altogether. Thirdly,
that the individual, and not the church, is to be the judge of his qualifications for
admission to the communion. But this is contrary to sound reason, and fatal to the
ends for which the church is instituted. For, if the conscience of the individual is to
be the rule of the action of the church in regard to his admission to the Lord's Supper,
why not also with regard to his regeneration, his doctrinal belief, and his obedience to
Christ's commands generally? Fourthly, that the church has no responsibility in
regard to the qualifications of those who come to her communion. But this is abandoning
the principle of the independence of the churches, and their accountableness to
Christ, and it overthrows all church discipline.</q>
</p>

<p>
See also Hovey, in Bib. Sac., 1862:133; Pepper, in Bap. Quar., 1867:216; Curtis on
Communion, 292; Howell, Terms of Communion; Williams, The Lord's Supper; Theodosia
Ernest, pub. by Am. Bap. Pub. Soc.; Wilkinson, The Baptist Principle. In concluding
our treatment of Ecclesiology, we desire to call attention to the fact that
Jacob, the English Churchman, in his Ecclesiastical Polity of the N. T., and Cunningham,
the Scotch Presbyterian, in his Croall Lectures for 1886, have furnished Baptists
with much valuable material for the defence of the New Testament doctrine of the
Church and its Ordinances. In fact, a complete statement of the Baptist positions
might easily be constructed from the concessions of their various opponents. See
A. H. Strong, on Unconscious Assumptions of Communion Polemics, in Philosophy and
Religion, 245-249.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='981'/><anchor id='Pg981'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part VIII. Eschatology, Or The Doctrine Of Final Things.</head>

<p>
Neither the individual Christian character, nor the Christian church as a
whole, attains its destined perfection in this life (Rom. 8:24). This perfection
is reached in the world to come (1 Cor. 13:10). As preparing the
way for the kingdom of God in its completeness, certain events are to take
place, such as death, Christ's second coming, the resurrection of the body,
the general judgment. As stages in the future condition of men, there is
to be an intermediate and an ultimate state, both for the righteous and for
the wicked. We discuss these events and states in what appears from
Scripture to be the order of their occurrence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in hope were we saved: but hope that is seen is not hope: for who hopeth for that which he seeth?</hi></q>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 13:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part will be done away.</hi></q> Original sin is
not wholly eradicated from the Christian, and the Holy Spirit is not yet sole ruler. So,
too, the church is still in a state of conflict, and victory is hereafter. But as the Christian
life attains its completeness only in the future, so with the life of sin. Death begins
here, but culminates hereafter. <hi rend='italic'>James 1:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the sin, when it is full grown, bringeth forth death.</hi></q>
The wicked man here has only a foretaste of <q><hi rend='italic'>the wrath to come</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 3:7</hi>). We may <q><hi rend='italic'>lay
up ... treasures in heaven</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 6:20</hi>), but we may also <q><hi rend='italic'>treasure up for ourselves wrath</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 2:5</hi>),
<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, lay up treasures in hell.
</p>

<p>
Dorner: <q>To the actuality of the consummation of the church belongs a cessation of
reproduction through which there is constantly renewed a world which the church
must subdue.... The mutually external existence of spirit and nature must give
way to a perfect internal existence. Their externality to each other is the ground of
the mortality of the natural side, and of its being a means of temptation to the spiritual
side. For in this externality the natural side has still too great independence and exerts
a determining power over the personality.... Art, the beautiful, receives in the
future state its special place; for it is the way of art to delight in visible presentation,
to achieve the classical and perfect with unfettered play of its powers. Every one
morally perfect will thus wed the good to the beautiful. In the rest, there will be no
inactivity; and in the activity also, no unrest.</q>
</p>

<p>
Schleiermacher: <q>Eschatology is essentially prophetic; and is therefore vague and
indefinite, like all unfulfilled prophecy.</q> Schiller's Thekla: <q>Every thought of beautiful,
trustful seeming Stands fulfilled in Heaven's eternal day; Shrink not then from
erring and from dreaming,&mdash;Lofty sense lies oft in childish play.</q> Frances Power
Cobbe, Peak of Darien, 265&mdash;<q>Human nature is a ship with the tide out; when the tide
of eternity comes in, we shall see the purpose of the ship.</q> Eschatology deals with the
precursors of Christ's second coming, as well as with the second coming itself. We are
to labor for the coming of the kingdom of God in society as well as in the individual
and in the church, in the present life as well as in the life to come.
</p>

<p>
Kidd, in his Principles of Western Civilization, says that survives which helps the
greatest number. But the greatest number is always in the future. The theatre has
become too wide for the drama. Through the roof the eternal stars appear. The image
of God in man implies the equality of all men. Political equality implies universal
suffrage; economic equality implies universal profit. Society has already transcended,
first, city isolation, and secondly, state isolation. The United States presents thus far
the largest free trade area in history. The next step is the unity of the English speaking
peoples. The days of separate nationalities are numbered. <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Laissez faire</foreign> = surviving
<pb n='982'/><anchor id='Pg982'/>
barbarism. There are signs of larger ideas in art, ethics, literature, philosophy,
science, politics, economics, religion. Competition must be moralized, and must take
into account the future as well as the present. See also Walter Rauschenbusch,
Christianity and the Social Crisis.
</p>

<p>
George B. Stevens, in Am. Jour. Theology, Oct. 1902: 666-684, asks: <q>Is there a self-constituted
New Testament Eschatology?</q> He answers, for substance, that only three
things are sure: 1. The certain triumph of the kingdom&mdash;this being the kernel of
truth in the doctrine of Christ's second coming; 2. the victory of life over death&mdash;the
truth in the doctrine of the resurrection; 3. the principle of judgment&mdash;the truth at
the basis of the belief in rewards and punishments in the world to come. This meagre
and abstract residuum argues denial both of the unity and the sufficiency of Scripture.
Our view of inspiration, while it does not assure us of minute details, does notwithstanding
give us a broad general outline of the future consummation, and guarantees
its trustworthiness by the word of Christ and his apostles.
</p>

<p>
Faith in that consummation is the main incitement to poetic utterance and to lofty
achievement. Shairp, Province of Poetry, 28&mdash;<q>If poetry be not a river fed from the
clear wells that spring on the highest summits of humanity, but only a canal to drain
off stagnant ditches from the flats, it may be a very useful sanitary contrivance, but
has not, in Bacon's words, any 'participation of divineness.'</q> Shakespeare uses prose
for ideas detached from emotion, such as the merrymaking of clowns or the maundering
of fools. But lofty thought with him puts on poetry as its singing robe. Savage,
Life beyond Death, 1-5&mdash;<q>When Henry D. Thoreau lay dying at Concord, his friend
Parker Pillsbury sat by his bedside. He leaned over, took him by the hand, and said:
<q>Henry, you are so near to the border now, can you see anything on the other side?</q>
And Thoreau answered: <q>One world at a time, Parker!</q> But I cannot help asking
about that other world, and if I belong to a future world as well as to this, my life will
be a very different one.</q> Jesus knew our need of certain information about the
future, and therefore he said: <q><hi rend='italic'>In my Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have
told you; for I go to prepare a place for you</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 14:2</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Hutton, Essays, 2:211&mdash;<q>Imagination may be powerful without being fertile; it may
summon up past scenes and live in them without being able to create new ones.
National unity and supernatural guidance were beliefs which kept Hebrew poetry
from being fertile or original in its dealings with human story; for national pride is
conservative, not inventive, and believers in actual providence do not care to live in
a world of invention. The Jew saw in history only the illustration of these two truths.
He was never thoroughly stirred by mere individual emotion. The modern poet is a
student of beauty; the O. T. poet a student of God. To the latter all creation is a mere
shadow; the essence of its beauty and the sustaining power of its life are in the spiritual
world. Go beyond the spiritual nature of man, and the sympathy of the Hebrew
poet is dried up at once. His poetry was true and divine, but at the expense of variousness
of insight and breadth of sympathy. It was heliocentric rather than geocentric.
Only Job, the latest, is a conscious effort of the imagination.</q> Apocalyptic poetry
for these reasons was most natural to the Hebrew mind.
</p>

<p>
Balfour, Foundations of Belief, 66&mdash;<q>Somewhere and for some Being, there shines an
unchanging splendor of beauty, of which in nature and in art we see, each of us from
his own standpoint, only passing gleams and stray reflections, whose different aspects
we cannot now coördinate, whose import we cannot fully comprehend, but which at
least is something other than the chance play of subjective sensibility or the far-off
echo of ancestral lusts.</q> Dewey, Psychology, 200&mdash;<q>All products of the creative
imagination are unconscious testimonials to the unity of spirit which binds man to
man, and man to nature, in one organic whole.</q> Tennyson, Idylls of the King: <q>As
from beyond the limit of the world, Like the last echo born of a great cry, Sounds,
as if some fair city were one voice Around a king returning from his wars.</q> See, on
the whole subject of Eschatology, Luthardt, Lehre von den letzten Dingen, and Saving
Truths of Christianity; Hodge, Systematic Theology, 3:713-880; Hovey, Biblical
Eschatology; Heagle, That Blessed Hope.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Physical Death.</head>

<p>
Physical death is the separation of the soul from the body. We distinguish
it from spiritual death, or the separation of the soul from God; and
from the second death, or the banishment from God and final misery of the
reünited soul and body of the wicked.
</p>

<pb n='983'/><anchor id='Pg983'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Spiritual death: <hi rend='italic'>Is. 59:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>but your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have
hid his face from you, so that he will not hear</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 7:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of
the body of this death?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>dead through your trespasses and sins.</hi></q> The second death: <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 2:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He
that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>20:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And death and Hades were cast into the
lake of fire. This is the second death, even the lake of fire</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>21:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But for the fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable,
and murderers, and fornicators, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, their part shall be in the lake that
burneth with fire and brimstone; which is the second death.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 2:303&mdash;<q>Spiritual death, the inner discord and
enslavement of the soul, and the misery resulting therefrom, to which belongs that
other death, the second death, an outward condition corresponding to that inner
slavery.</q> Trench, Epistles to the Seven Churches, 151&mdash;<q>This phrase [<q><hi rend='italic'>second death</hi></q>] is
itself a solemn protest against the Sadduceeism and Epicureanism which would make
natural death the be-all and the end-all of existence. As there is a life beyond the
present life for the faithful, so there is death beyond that which falls under our eyes
for the wicked.</q> E. G. Robinson: <q>The second death is the continuance of spiritual
death in another and timeless existence.</q> Hudson, Scientific Demonstration of a
Future Life, 222&mdash;<q>If a man has a power that transcends the senses, it is at least presumptive
evidence that it does not perish when the senses are extinguished.... The
activity of the subjective mind is in inverse proportion to that of the body, though the
objective mind weakens with the body and perishes with the brain.</q>
</p>

<p>
Prof. H. H. Bawden: <q>Consciousness is simply the growing of an organism, while
the organism is just that which grows. Consciousness is a function, not a thing, not
an order of existence at all. It is the universe coming to a focus, flowering so to speak
in a finite centre. Society is an organism in the same sense that the human being is an
organism. The spatial separation of the elements of the social organism is relatively
no greater than the separation of the unit factors of the body. As the neurone cannot
deny the consciousness which is the function of the body, so the individual member of
society has no reason for denying the existence of a cosmic life of the organism which
we call society.</q>
</p>

<p>
Emma M. Caillard, on Man in the Light of Evolution, in Contemp. Rev., Dec. 1893:878&mdash;<q>Man
is nature risen into the consciousness of its relationship to the divine.
There is no receding from this point. When <q>that which drew from out the boundless
deep turns again home,</q> the persistence of each personal life is necessitated. Human
life, as it is, includes, though it transcends the lower forms through which it has developed.
Human life, as it will be, must include though it may transcend its present manifestation,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>, personality.</q> <q>Sometime, when all life's lessons have been learned, And
suns and stars forevermore have set, And things which our weak judgments here have
spurned, The things o'er which we grieved with lashes wet, Will flash before us through
our life's dark night, As stars shine most in deepest tints of blue: And we shall see how
all God's plans were right, And most that seemed reproof was love most true: And if
sometimes commingled with life's wine We find the wormwood and rebel and shrink,
Be sure a wiser hand than yours or mine Pours out this portion for our lips to drink.
And if some friend we love is lying low, Where human kisses cannot reach his face, O
do not blame the loving Father so, But wear your sorrow with obedient grace; And
you shall shortly know that lengthened breath Is not the sweetest gift God sends his
friend, And that sometimes the sable pall of death Conceals the fairest boon his love
can send. If we could push ajar the gates of life, And stand within, and all God's working
see, We could interpret all this doubt and strife, And for each mystery find a key.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Although physical death falls upon the unbeliever as the original penalty
of sin, to all who are united in Christ it loses its aspect of penalty, and
becomes a means of discipline and of entrance into eternal life.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
To the Christian, physical death is not a penalty: <hi rend='italic'>see Ps. 116:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Precious in the sight of Jehovah
Is the death of his saints</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the spirit is life
because of righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>14:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; or whether we die, we die unto the
Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord's</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 3:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>15:55</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>O death, where is thy
victory? O death, where is thy sting?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 4:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For unto this end was the gospel preached even to the dead,
that they might be judged indeed according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Rom.
1:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hinder
the truth in unrighteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>8:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. For
the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus made me free from the law of sin and of death</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 12:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For
whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth.</hi></q>
</p>

<pb n='984'/><anchor id='Pg984'/>

<p>
Dr. Hovey says that <q>the present sufferings of believers are in the nature of discipline,
with an aspect of retribution; while the present sufferings of unbelievers are
retributive, with a glance toward reformation.</q> We prefer to say that all penalty has
been borne by Christ, and that, for him who is justified in Christ, suffering of whatever
kind is of the nature of fatherly chastening, never of judicial retribution; see our discussion
of the Penalty of Sin, pages 652-660.
</p>

<p>
<q>We see but dimly through the mists and vapors Amid these earthly damps; What are
to us but sad funereal tapers May be Heaven's distant lamps. There is no death,&mdash;what
seems so is transition; This life of mortal breath Is but a suburb of the life Elysian
Whose portal men call death.</q> <q>'Tis meet that we should pause awhile, Ere we put off
this mortal coil, And in the stillness of old age, Muse on our earthly pilgrimage.</q>
Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet, 4:5&mdash;<q>Heaven and yourself Had part in this fair maid;
now Heaven hath all, And all the better is it for the maid: Your part in her you could
not keep from death, But Heaven keeps his part in eternal life. The most you sought
was her promotion, For 't was your heaven she should be advanced; And weep ye now,
seeing she is advanced Above the clouds, as high as Heaven itself?</q> Phœbe Cary's
Answered: <q>I thought to find some healing clime For her I loved; she found that
shore, That city whose inhabitants Are sick and sorrowful no more. I asked for human
love for her; The Loving knew how best to still The infinite yearning of a heart Which
but infinity could fill. Such sweet communion had been ours, I prayed that it might
never end; My prayer is more than answered; now I have an angel for my friend. I
wished for perfect peace to soothe The troubled anguish of her breast; And numbered
with the loved and called She entered on untroubled rest. Life was so fair a thing to
her, I wept and pleaded for its stay; My wish was granted me, for lo! She hath eternal
life to-day!</q>
</p>

<p>
Victor Hugo: <q>The tomb is not a blind alley; it is a thoroughfare. It closes with
the twilight, to open with the dawn.... I feel that I have not said the thousandth
part of what is in me.... The thirst for infinity proves infinity.</q> Shakespeare:
<q>Nothing is here for tears; nothing to wail, Or knock the breast; no weakness, no
contempt, Dispraise or blame; nothing but well and fair.</q> O. W. Holmes: <q>Build
thee more stately mansions, O my soul, As the swift seasons roll! Leave thy low-vaulted
past! Let each new temple, nobler than the last Shut thee from heaven with a dome
more vast, Till thou at length art free, Leaving thine outgrown shell by life's unresting
sea!</q> J. G. Whittier: <q>So when Time's veil shall fall asunder, The soul may know
No fearful change or sudden wonder, Nor sink the weight of mystery under, But with
the upward rise, and with the vastness grow.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
To neither saint nor sinner is death a cessation of being. This we maintain,
against the advocates of annihilation:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Upon rational grounds.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The metaphysical argument.&mdash;The soul is simple, not compounded.
Death, in matter, is the separation of parts. But in the soul there are no
parts to be separated. The dissolution of the body, therefore, does not
necessarily work a dissolution of the soul. But, since there is an immaterial
principle in the brute, and this argument taken by itself might seem to
prove the immortality of the animal creation equally with that of man, we
pass to consider the next argument.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Gnostics and the Manichæans held that beasts had knowledge and might pray.
The immateriality of the brute mind was probably the consideration which led Leibnitz,
Bishop Butler, Coleridge, John Wesley, Lord Shaftesbury, Mary Somerville,
James Hogg, Toplady, Lamartine, and Louis Agassiz to encourage the belief in animal
immortality. See Bp. Butler, Analogy, part i, chap. i (Bohn's ed., 81-91); Agassiz,
Essay on Classification, 99&mdash;<q>Most of the arguments for the immortality of man apply
equally to the permanency of this principle in other living beings.</q> Elsewhere Agassiz
says of animals: <q>I cannot doubt of their immortality any more than I doubt
of my own.</q> Lord Shaftesbury in 1881 remarked: <q>I have ever believed in a happy
future for animals; I cannot say or conjecture how or where; but sure I am that the
love, so manifested by dogs especially, is an emanation from the divine essence, and as
such it can, or rather, it will, never be extinguished.</q> St. Francis of Assisi preached
<pb n='985'/><anchor id='Pg985'/>
to birds, and called sun, moon, earth, fire, water, stones, flowers, crickets, and death,
his brothers and sisters. <q>He knew not if the brotherhood His homily had understood;
He only knew that to one ear The meaning of his words was clear</q> (Longfellow,
The Sermon of St. Francis&mdash;to the birds). <q>If death dissipates the sagacity of
the elephant, why not that of his captor?</q> See Buckner, Immortality of Animals;
William Adams Brown, Christian Theology in Outline, 240.
</p>

<p>
Mansel, Metaphysics, 371, maintains that all this argument proves is that the objector
cannot show the soul to be compound, and so cannot show that it is destructible.
Calderwood, Moral Philosophy, 259&mdash;<q>The facts which point toward the termination
of our present state of existence are connected with our physical nature, not with our
mental.</q> John Fiske, Destiny of the Creature, 110&mdash;<q>With his illegitimate hypothesis
of annihilation, the materialist transgresses the bounds of experience quite as widely
as the poet who sings of the New Jerusalem, with its river of life and its streets of
gold. Scientifically speaking, there is not a particle of evidence for either view.</q>
John Fiske, Life Everlasting, 80-85&mdash;<q>How could immortal man have been produced
through heredity from an ephemeral brute? We do not know. Nature's habit is to
make prodigious leaps, but only after long preparation. Slowly rises the water in the
tank, inch by inch through many a weary hour, until at length it overflows, and
straightway vast systems of machinery are awakened into rumbling life. Slowly
the ellipse becomes eccentric, until suddenly the finite ellipse becomes an infinite
paraboloid.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ladd, Philosophy of Mind, 206&mdash;<q>The ideas of dividing up or splitting off are not
applicable to mind. The argument for the indestructibility of mind as growing out of its
indiscerptibility, and the argument by which Kant confuted it, are alike absurd within
the realm of mental phenomena.</q> Adeney, Christianity and Evolution, 127&mdash;<q>Nature,
this argument shows, has nothing to say against the immortality of that which is above
the range of physical structure.</q> Lotze: <q>Everything which has once originated
will endure forever so soon as it possesses an unalterable value for the coherent system
of the world; but it will, as a matter of course, in turn cease to be, if this is not
the case.</q> Bowne, Int. to Psych. Theory, 315-318&mdash;<q>Of what use would brutes be
hereafter? We may reply: Of what use are they here?... Those things which have
perennial significance for the universe will abide.</q> Bixby, Crisis in Morals, 203&mdash;<q>In
living beings there is always a pressure toward larger and higher existence.... The
plant must grow, must bloom, must sow its seeds, or it withers away.... The aim is
to bring forth consciousness, and in greatest fulness.... Beasts of prey and other
enemies to the ascending path of life are to be swept out of the way.</q>
</p>

<p>
But is not the brute a part of that Nature which has been subjected to vanity, which
groans and travails in pain, and which waits to be redeemed? The answer seems to be
that the brute is a mere appendage to man, has no independent value in the creation,
is incapable of ethical life or of communion with God the source of life, and so has no
guarantee of continuance. Man on the other hand is of independent value. But this
is to anticipate the argument which follows. It is sufficient here to point out that
there is no proof that consciousness is dependent upon the soul's connection with a
physical organism. McLane, Evolution in Religion, 261&mdash;<q>As the body may preserve
its form and be to a degree made to act after the psychic element is lost by removal of
the brain, so this psychic element may exist, and act according to its nature after the
physical element ceases to exist.</q> Hovey, Bib. Eschatology, 19&mdash;<q>If I am in a house,
I can look upon surrounding objects only through its windows; but open the door
and let me go out of the house, and the windows are no longer of any use to me.</q>
Shaler, Interpretation of Nature, 295&mdash;<q>To perpetuate mind after death is less surprising
than to perpetuate or transmit mind here by inheritance.</q> See also Martineau,
Study, 2:332-337, 363-365.
</p>

<p>
William James, in his Essay on Human Immortality, argues that thought is not necessarily
a <emph>productive</emph> function of the brain; it may rather be a permissive or <emph>transmissive</emph>
function. Thought is not <emph>made</emph> in the brain, so that when the brain perishes the soul
dies. The brain is only the organ for the <emph>transmission</emph> of thought, just as the lens
transmits the light which it does not produce. There is a spiritual world behind and
above the material world. Our brains are thin and half transparent places in the veil,
through which knowledge comes in. Savage, Life after Death, 289&mdash;<q>You may attach
a dynamo for a time to some particular machine. When you have removed the machine,
you have not destroyed the dynamo. You may attach it to some other machine and
find that you have the old time power. So the soul may not be confined to one body.</q>
These analogies seem to us to come short of proving personal immortality. They
<pb n='986'/><anchor id='Pg986'/>
belong to <q>psychology without a soul,</q> and while they illustrate the persistence of
some sort of life, they do not render more probable the continuance of my individual
consciousness beyond the bounds of death. They are entirely consistent with the pantheistic
theory of a remerging of the personal existence in the great whole of which it
forms a part. Tennyson, In Memoriam: <q>That each, who seems a separate whole,
Should move his rounds and, fusing all The skirts of self again, should fall Remerging
in the general Soul, Is faith as vague as all unsweet.</q> See Pfleiderer, Die Ritschl'sche
Theologie, 12; Howison, Limits of Evolution, 279-312.
</p>

<p>
Seth, Hegelianism: <q>For Hegel, immortality is only the permanence of the Absolute,
the abstract process. This is no more consoling than the continued existence of the
chemical elements of our bodies in new transformations. Human self-consciousness is a
spark struck in the dark, to die away on the darkness whence it has arisen.</q> This is the
only immortality of which George Eliot conceived in her poem, The Immortal Choir:
<q>O may I join the choir invisible Of those immortal dead who live again In minds made
better by their presence; live In pulses stirred to generosity, In deeds of daring rectitude,
in scorn For miserable aims that end in self, In thoughts sublime that pierce the
night like stars, And with their mild persistence urge man's search To vaster issues.</q>
Those who hold to this unconscious immortality concede that death is not a separation
of parts, but rather a cessation of consciousness; and that therefore, while the substance
of human nature may endure, mankind may ever develop into new forms, without
individual immortality. To this we reply, that man's self-consciousness and self-determination
are different in kind from the consciousness and determination of the brute.
As man can direct his self-consciousness and self-determination to immortal ends, we
have the right to believe this self-consciousness and self-determination to be immortal.
This leads us to the next argument.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The teleological argument.&mdash;Man, as an intellectual, moral, and
religious being, does not attain the end of his existence on earth. His
development is imperfect here. Divine wisdom will not leave its work
incomplete. There must be a hereafter for the full growth of man's powers,
and for the satisfaction of his aspirations. Created, unlike the brute, with
infinite capacities for moral progress, there must be an immortal existence
in which those capacities shall be brought into exercise. Though the
wicked forfeit all claim to this future, we have here an argument from
God's love and wisdom to the immortality of the righteous.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In reply to this argument, it has been said that many right wishes are vain. Mill,
Essays on Religion, 294&mdash;<q>Desire for food implies enough to eat, now and forever?
hence an eternal supply of cabbage?</q> But our argument proceeds upon three presuppositions:
(1) that a holy and benevolent God exists; (2) that he has made man in
his image; (3) that man's true end is holiness and likeness to God. Therefore, what
will answer the true end of man will be furnished; but that is not cabbage&mdash;it is holiness
and love, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, God himself. See Martineau, Study, 2:370-381.
</p>

<p>
The argument, however, is valuable only in its application to the righteous. God
will not treat the righteous as the tyrant of Florence treated Michael Angelo, when he
bade him carve out of ice a statue, which would melt under the first rays of the sun.
In the case of the wicked, the other law of retribution comes in&mdash;the taking away
of <q><hi rend='italic'>even that which he hath</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:29</hi>). Since we are all wicked, the argument is not satisfactory,
unless we take into account the further facts of atonement and justification&mdash;facts
of which we learn from revelation alone.
</p>

<p>
But while, taken by itself, this rational argument might be called defective, and
could never prove that man may not attain his end in the continued existence of the
race, rather than in that of the individual, the argument appears more valuable as a
rational supplement to the facts already mentioned, and seems to render certain at
least the immortality of those upon whom God has set his love, and in whom he has
wrought the beginnings of righteousness.
</p>

<p>
Lord Erskine: <q>Inferior animals have no instincts or faculties which are not subservient
to the ends and purposes of their being. Man's reason, and faculties endowed
with power to reach the most distant worlds, would be useless if his existence were
to terminate in the grave.</q> There would be wastefulness in the extinction of great
minds; see Jackson, James Martineau, 439. As water is implied by the organization of
<pb n='987'/><anchor id='Pg987'/>
the fish, and air by that of the bird, so <q>the existence of spiritual power within us is
likewise presumption that some fitting environment awaits the spirit when it shall be
set free and perfected, and sex and death can be dispensed with</q> (Newman Smyth,
Place of Death in Evolution, 106). Nägeli, the German botanist, says that Nature tends
to perfection. Yet the mind hardly begins to awake, ere the bodily powers decline
(George, Progress and Poverty, 505). <q>Character grows firmer and solider as the body
ages and grows weaker. Can character be vitally implicated in the act of physical
dissolution?</q> (Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 353). If a rational and moral Deity has caused
the gradual evolution in humanity of the ideas of right and wrong, and has added to it
the faculty of creating ethical ideals, must he not have provided some satisfaction for
the ethical needs which this development has thus called into existence? (Balfour,
Foundations of Belief, 351).
</p>

<p>
Royce, Conception of God, 50, quotes Le Conte as follows: <q>Nature is the womb <emph>in</emph>
which, and evolution the process <emph>by</emph> which, are generated sons of God. Without
immortality this whole process is balked&mdash;the whole process of cosmic evolution is
futile. Shall God be so long and at so great pains to achieve a <emph>spirit</emph>, capable of communing
with himself, and then allow it to lapse again into nothingness?</q> John Fiske,
Destiny of Man, 116, accepts the immortality of the soul by <q>a supreme act of faith in
the reasonableness of God's work.</q> If man is the end of the creative process and the
object of God's care, then the soul's career cannot be completed with its present life
upon the earth (Newman Smyth, Place of Death in Evolution, 92, 93). Bowne, Philosophy
of Theism, 254&mdash;<q>Neither God nor the future life is needed to pay us for present
virtue, but rather as the condition without which our nature falls into irreconcilable
discord with itself, and passes on to pessimism and despair. High and continual effort
is impossible without correspondingly high and abiding hopes.... It is no more
selfish to desire to live hereafter than it is to desire to live to-morrow.</q> Dr. M. B.
Anderson used to say that there must be a heaven for canal horses, washerwomen,
and college presidents, because they do not get their deserts in this life.
</p>

<p>
Life is a series of commencements rather than of accomplished ends. Longfellow, on
Charles Sumner: <q>Death takes us by surprise, And stays our hurrying feet; The great
design unfinished lies, Our lives are incomplete. But in the dark unknown Perfect
their circles seem, Even as a bridge's arch of stone Is rounded in the stream.</q> Robert
Browning, Abt Vogler: <q>There never shall be one lost good</q>; Prospice: <q>No work
begun shall ever pause for death</q>; <q>Pleasure must succeed to pleasure, else past
pleasure turns to pain; And this first life claims a second, else I count its good no
gain</q>; Old Pictures in Florence: <q>We are faulty&mdash;why not? We have time in store</q>;
Grammarian's Funeral: <q>What's time? Leave Now for dogs and apes,&mdash;Man has Forever.</q>
Robert Browning wrote in his wife's Testament the following testimony of
Dante: <q>Thus I believe, thus I affirm, thus I am certain it is, that from this life I
shall pass to another better, there where that lady lives, of whom my soul was enamored.</q>
And Browning says in a letter: <q>It is a great thing&mdash;the greatest&mdash;that a
human being should have passed the probation of life, and sum up its experience in a
witness to the power and love of God.... I see even more reason to hold by the
same hope.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The ethical argument.&mdash;Man is not, in this world, adequately punished
for his evil deeds. Our sense of justice leads us to believe that God's
moral administration will be vindicated in a life to come. Mere extinction
of being would not be a sufficient penalty, nor would it permit degrees of
punishment corresponding to degrees of guilt. This is therefore an argument
from God's justice to the immortality of the wicked. The guilty conscience
demands a state after death for punishment.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This is an argument from God's justice to the immortality of the wicked, as the preceding
was an argument from God's love to the immortality of the righteous.
<q>History defies our moral sense by giving a peaceful end to Sulla.</q> Louis XV and
Madame Pompadour died in their beds, after a life of extreme luxury. Louis XVI and
his queen, though far more just and pure, perished by an appalling tragedy. The fates
of these four cannot be explained by the wickedness of the latter pair and the virtue
of the former. Alexander the Sixth, the worst of the popes, was apparently prosperous
and happy in his iniquities. Though guilty of the most shameful crimes, he was
serenely impenitent, and to the last of his days he defied both God and man. Since
<pb n='988'/><anchor id='Pg988'/>
there is not an execution of justice here, we feel that there must be a <q><hi rend='italic'>judgment to come</hi>,</q>
such as that which terrified Felix (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 24:25</hi>). Martineau, Study, 2:383-388. Stopford
A. Brooke, Justice: <q>Three men went out one summer night, No care had they or
aim, And dined and drank. <q>Ere we go home We'll have,</q> they said, <q>a game.</q> Three
girls began that summer night A life of endless shame, And went through drink, disease,
and death As swift as racing flame. Lawless and homeless, foul, they died; Rich, loved
and praised, the men: But when they all shall meet with God, And Justice speaks,&mdash;what
then?</q> See John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 2:255-297. G. F. Wilkin,
Control in Evolution: <q>Belief in immortality is a practical necessity of evolution.
If the decisions of to-day are to determine our eternal destiny, then it is vastly more
important to choose and act aright, than it is to preserve our earthly life. The martyrs
were right. Conscience is vindicated. We can live for the ideal of manhood.
Immortality is a powerful reformatory instrument.</q> Martineau, Study of Religion,
2:388&mdash;<q>If Death gives a final discharge to the sinner and the saint alike, Conscience has
told us more lies than it has ever called to their account.</q> Shakespeare, Henry V,
4:2&mdash;<q>If [transgressors] have defeated the law and outrun native punishment,
though they can outstrip men, they have no wings to fly from God</q>; Henry VI, 2d
part, 5:2&mdash;<q>Can we outrun the heavens?</q> Addison, Cato: <q>It must be so,&mdash;Plato,
thou reasonest well.&mdash;Else whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire, This longing
after immortality? Or whence this secret dread and inward horror Of falling into
naught? Why shrinks the soul Back on herself and startles at destruction? 'Tis the
divinity that stirs within us, 'Tis Heaven itself that points out a hereafter, And intimates
eternity to man.</q>
</p>

<p>
Gildersleeve, in The Independent, March 30, 1899&mdash;<q>Plato in the Phædo argues for
immortality from the alternation of opposites: life must follow death as death follows
life. But alternation of opposites is not generation of opposites. He argues from
reminiscence. But this involves pre-existence and a cycle of incarnations, not the
immortality which we crave. The soul abides, as the idea abides, but there is no guarantee
that it abides forever. He argues from the uncompounded nature of the soul.
But we do not know the soul's nature, and at most this is an analogy: as soul is like
God, invisible, it must like God abide. But this is analogy, and nothing more.</q>
William James, Will to Believe, 87&mdash;<q>That our whole physical life may lie soaking in a
spiritual atmosphere, a dimension of being which we at present have no organ for
apprehending, is vividly suggested to us by the analogy of the life of our domestic animals.
Our dogs, for example, are <emph>in</emph> our human life, but are not of it. They bite, but
do not know what it means; they submit to vivisection, and do not know the meaning
of that.</q>
</p>

<p>
George Eliot, walking with Frederic Myers in the Fellows' Garden at Trinity, Cambridge,
<q>stirred somewhat beyond her wont, and taking as her text the three words
which have been used so often as the inspiring trumpet-calls of men&mdash;the words God,
Immortality, Duty&mdash;pronounced with terrible earnestness how inconceivable was the
first, how unbelievable the second, and yet how peremptory and absolute the third.</q>
But this idea of the infinite nature of Duty is the creation of Christianity&mdash;the last
infinite would never have attained its present range and intensity, had it not been indissolubly
connected with the other two (Forrest, Christ of History and Experience, 16).
</p>

<p>
This ethical argument has probably more power over the minds of men than any
other. Men believe in Minos and Rhadamanthus, if not in the Elysian Fields. But
even here it may be replied that the judgment which conscience threatens may be,
not immortality, but extinction of being. We shall see, however, in our discussion
of the endlessness of future punishment, that mere annihilation cannot satisfy the
moral instinct which lies at the basis of this argument. That demands a punishment
proportioned in each case to the guilt incurred by transgression. Extinction of being
would be the same to all. As it would not admit of degrees, so it would not, in any
case, sufficiently vindicate God's righteousness. F. W. Newman: <q>If man be not
immortal, God is not just.</q>
</p>

<p>
But while this argument proves life and punishment for the wicked after death, it
leaves us dependent on revelation for our knowledge how long that life and punishment
will be. Kant's argument is that man strives equally for morality and for well-being;
but morality often requires the sacrifice of well-being; hence there must be a
future reconciliation of the two in the well-being or reward of virtue. To all of which
it might be answered, first, that there is no virtue so perfect as to merit reward; and
secondly, that virtue is its <emph>own</emph> reward, and so <emph>is</emph> well-being.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='989'/><anchor id='Pg989'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The historical argument.&mdash;The popular belief of all nations and
ages shows that the idea of immortality is natural to the human mind. It
is not sufficient to say that this indicates only such desire for continued
earthly existence as is necessary to self-preservation; for multitudes expect
a life beyond death without desiring it, and multitudes desire a heavenly
life without caring for the earthly. This testimony of man's nature to
immortality may be regarded as the testimony of the God who made the
nature.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Testimonies to this popular belief are given in Bartlett, Life and Death Eternal, preface:
The arrow-heads and earthen vessels laid by the side of the dead Indian; the
silver obolus put in the mouth of the dead Greek to pay Charon's passage money; the
furnishing of the Egyptian corpse with the Book of the Dead, the papyrus-roll containing
the prayer he is to offer and the chart of his journey through the unseen world.
The Gauls did not hesitate to lend money, on the sole condition that he to whom they
lent it would return it to them in the other life,&mdash;so sure were they that they should
get it again (Valerius Maximus, quoted in Boissier, La Religion Romaine, 1:264). The
Laplanders bury flint and tinder with the dead, to furnish light for the dark journey.
The Norsemen buried the horse and armor for the dead hero's triumphant ride. The
Chinese scatter paper images of sedan porters over the grave, to help along in the
sombre pilgrimage. The Greenlanders bury with the child a dog to guide him (George
Dana Boardman, Sermon on Immortality).
</p>

<p>
Savage, Life after Death, 1-18&mdash;<q>Candles at the head of the casket are the modern
representatives of the primitive man's fire which was to light the way of the soul on its
dark journey.... Ulysses talks in the underworld with the shade of Hercules
though the real Hercules, a demigod, had been transferred to Olympus, and was there
living in companionship with the gods.... The Brahman desired to escape being
reborn. Socrates: <q>To die and be released is better for me.</q> Here I am walking on a
plank. It reaches out into the fog, and I have got to keep walking. I can see only ten
feet ahead of me. I know that pretty soon I must walk over the end of that plank,&mdash;I
haven't the slightest idea into what, and I don't believe anybody else knows. And I
don't like it.</q> Matthew Arnold: <q>Is there no other life? Pitch this one high.</q> But
without positive revelation most men will say: <q><hi rend='italic'>Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:32</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>By passionately loving life, we make Loved life unlovely, hugging her to death.</q>
Theodore Parker: <q>The intuition of mortality is written in the heart of man by a
Hand that writes no falsehoods.... There is evidence of a summer yet to be, in the
buds which lie folded through our northern winter&mdash;efflorescences in human nature
unaccountable if the end of man is in the grave.</q> But it may be replied that many
universal popular impressions have proved false, such as belief in ghosts, and in the
moving of the sun round the earth. While the mass of men have believed in immortality,
some of the wisest have been doubters. Cyrus said: <q>I cannot imagine that
the soul lives only while it remains in this mortal body.</q> But the dying words of
Socrates were: <q>We part; I am going to die, and you to live; which of us goes the
better way is known to God alone.</q> Cicero declared: <q>Upon this subject I entertain
no more than conjectures;</q> and said that, when he was reading Plato's argument for
immortality, he seemed to himself convinced, but when he laid down the book he
found that all his doubts returned. Farrar, Darkness and Dawn, 134&mdash;<q>Though Cicero
wrote his Tusculan Disputations to prove the doctrine of immortality, he spoke of
that doctrine in his letters and speeches as a mere pleasing speculation, which might
be discussed with interest, but which no one practically held.</q>
</p>

<p>
Aristotle, Nic. Ethics, 3:9, calls death <q>the most to be feared of all things ... for it
appears to be the end of everything; and for the deceased there appears to be no longer
either any good or any evil.</q> Æschylus: <q>Of one once dead there is no resurrection.</q>
Catullus: <q>When once our brief day has set, we must sleep one everlasting night.</q>
Tacitus: <q>If there is a place for the spirits of the pious; if, as the wise suppose, great
souls do not become extinct with their bodies.</q> <q>In that <emph>if</emph>,</q> says Uhlhorn, <q>lies the
whole torturing uncertainty of heathenism.</q> Seneca, Ep. liv.&mdash;<q>Mors est non esse</q>&mdash;<q>Death
is not to be</q>; Troades, V, 393&mdash;<q>Post mortem nihil est, ipsaque mors
nihil</q>&mdash;<q>There is nothing after death, and death itself is nothing.</q> Marcus Aurelius:
<q>What springs from earth dissolves to earth again, and heavenborn things fly to their
<pb n='990'/><anchor id='Pg990'/>
native seat.</q> The Emperor Hadrian to his soul: <q>Animula, vagula, blandula, Hospes
comesque corporis, Quæ nunc abibis in loca? Pallidula, rigida, nudula.</q> Classic
writers might have said of the soul at death: <q>We know not where is that Promethean
torch That can its light relume.</q>
</p>

<p>
Chadwick, 184&mdash;<q>With the growth of all that is best in man of intelligence and affection,
there goes the development of the hope of an immortal life. If the hope thus
developed is not a valid one, then we have a radical contradiction in our moral nature.
The survival of the fittest points in the same direction.</q> Andrew Marvell (1621-1678)&mdash;<q>At
my back I always hear Time's winged chariot hurrying near; And yonder all
before us lie Deserts of vast Eternity.</q> Goethe in his last days came to be a profound
believer in immortality. <q>You ask me what are my grounds for this belief? The
weightiest is this, that we cannot do without it.</q> Huxley wrote in a letter to Morley:
<q>It is a curious thing that I find my dislike to the thought of extinction increasing as I
get older and nearer the goal. It flashes across me at all sorts of time that in 1900 I shall
probably know no more of what is going on than I did in 1800. I had sooner be in hell,
a great deal,&mdash;at any rate in one of the upper circles, where climate and the company
are not too trying.</q>
</p>

<p>
The book of Job shows how impossible it is for man to work out the problem of personal
immortality from the point of view of merely natural religion. Shakespeare, in
Measure for Measure, represents Claudio as saying to his sister Isabella: <q>Aye, but to
die, and go we know not where; To lie in cold obstruction and to rot; This sensible
warm motion to become A kneaded clod.</q> Strauss, Glaubenslehre, 2:739&mdash;<q>The other
world is in all men the one enemy, in its aspect of a future world, however, the last
enemy, which speculative criticism has to fight, and if possible to overcome.</q> Omar
Khayyám, Rubáiyát, Stanzas 28-35&mdash;<q>I came like Water, and like Wind I go.... Up
from Earth's Centre through the seventh gate I rose, and on the throne of Saturn sate,
And many a knot unravelled by the Road, But not the master-knot of human fate.
There was the Door to which I found no Key; There was the Veil through which I
might not see: Some little talk awhile of <emph>Me</emph> and <emph>Thee</emph> There was,&mdash;And then no more
of <emph>Thee</emph> and <emph>Me</emph>. Earth could not answer, nor the Seas that mourn, In flowing purple,
of their Lord forlorn; Nor rolling Heaven, with all his signs revealed, And hidden by
the sleeve of Night and Morn. Then of the <emph>Thee in Me</emph>, who works behind The veil, I
lifted up my hands to find A Lamp, amid the darkness; and I heard As from without&mdash;<q>The
Me within Thee blind.</q> Then to the lip of this poor earthen Urn I leaned,
the secret of my life to learn; And Lip to Lip it murmur'd&mdash;<q>While you live, Drink!&mdash;for,
once dead, you never shall return!</q></q> So <q>The Phantom Caravan has reached The
Nothing it set out from.</q> It is a demonstration of the hopelessness and blindness and
sensuality of man, when left without the revelation of God and of the life to come.
</p>

<p>
The most that can be claimed for this fourth argument from popular belief is that it
indicates a general appentency for continued existence after death, and that the idea is
congruous with our nature. W. E. Forster said to Harriet Martineau that he would
rather be damned than annihilated; see F. P. Cobbe, Peak of Darien, 44. But it may
be replied that there is reason enough for this desire for life in the fact that it ensures
the earthly existence of the race, which might commit universal suicide without it.
There is reason enough in the present life for its existence, and we are not necessitated
to infer a future life therefrom. This objection cannot be fully answered from reason
alone. But if we take our argument in connection with the Scriptural revelation concerning
God's making of man in his image, we may regard the testimony of man's
nature as the testimony of the God who made it.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We conclude our statement of these rational proofs with the acknowledgment
that they rest upon the presupposition that there exists a God of truth,
wisdom, justice, and love, who has made man in his image, and who desires
to commune with his creatures. We acknowledge, moreover, that these
proofs give us, not an absolute demonstration, but only a balance of probability,
in favor of man's immortality. We turn therefore to Scripture for
the clear revelation of a fact of which reason furnishes us little more than
a presumption.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Everett, Essays, 76, 77&mdash;<q>In his Träume eines Geistersehers, Kant foreshadows the
Method of his Kritik. He gives us a scheme of disembodied spirits, and calls it a bit of
mystic (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>geheimen</foreign>) philosophy; then the opposite view, which he calls a bit of vulgar
<pb n='991'/><anchor id='Pg991'/>
(<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>gemeimen</foreign>) philosophy. Then he says the scales of the understanding are not quite
impartial, and the one that has the inscription <q>Hope for the future</q> has a mechanical
advantage. He says he cannot rid himself of this unfairness. He suffers feeling to
determine the result. This is intellectual agnosticism supplemented by religious faith.</q>
The following lines have been engraved upon the tomb of Professor Huxley: <q>And if
there be no meeting past the grave, If all is darkness, silence, yet 'tis rest. Be not
afraid, ye waiting hearts that weep, For God still giveth his beloved sleep, And if an
endless sleep he wills, so best.</q> Contrast this consolation with: <q><hi rend='italic'>Let not your heart be
troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would
have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive
you unto myself, that where I am, there ye may be also</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 14:1-3</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Dorner: <q>There is no rational evidence which compels belief in immortality.
Immortality has its pledge in God's making man in his image, and in God's will of love
for communion with men.</q> Luthardt, Compendium, 289&mdash;<q>The truth in these proofs
from reason is the idea of human personality and its relation to God. Belief in God is
the universal presupposition and foundation of the universal belief in immortality.</q>
When Strauss declared that this belief in immortality is the last enemy which is to be
destroyed, he forgot that belief in God is more ineradicable still. Frances Power Cobbe,
Life, 92&mdash;<q>The doctrine of immortality is to me the indispensable corollary of that of
the goodness of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hadley, Essays, Philological and Critical, 392-397&mdash;<q>The claim of immortality may be
based on one or the other of two assumptions: (1) The same organism will be reproduced
hereafter, and the same functions, or part of them, again manifested in connection
with it, and accompanied with consciousness of continued identity; or, (2) The
same functions may be exercised and accompanied with consciousness of identity,
though not connected with the same organism as before; may in fact go on without
interruption, without being even suspended by death, though no longer manifested to
us.</q> The conclusion is: <q>The light of nature, when all directed to this question, does
furnish a presumption in favor of immortality, but not so strong a presumption as to
exclude great and reasonable doubts upon the subject.</q>
</p>

<p>
For an excellent synopsis of arguments and objections, see Hase, Hutterus Redivivus,
276. See also Bowen, Metaph. and Ethics, 417-441; A. M. Fairbairn, on Idea of Immortality,
in Studies in Philos. of Religion and of History; Wordsworth, Intimations of
Immortality; Tennyson, Two Voices; Alger, Critical History of Doctrine of Future
Life, with Appendix by Ezra Abbott, containing a Catalogue of Works relating to the
Nature, Origin, and Destiny of the Soul; Ingersoll Lectures on Immortality, by George
A. Gordon, Josiah Royce, William James, Dr. Osler, John Fiske, B. I. Wheeler, Hyslop,
Münsterberg, Crothars.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Upon scriptural grounds.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The account of man's creation, and the subsequent allusions to it
in Scripture, show that, while the body was made corruptible and subject
to death, the soul was made in the image of God, incorruptible and
immortal.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gen. 1:26, 27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Let us make man in our image</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And Jehovah God formed man of the dust of the ground,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul</hi></q>&mdash;here, as was shown in
our treatment of Man's Original State, page 523, it is not the divine image, but the
body, that is formed of dust; and into this body the soul that possesses the divine image
is breathed. In the Hebrew records, the animating soul is everywhere distinguished
from the earthly body. <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 3:22, 23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil;
and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: therefore Jehovah God
sent him forth from the garden of Eden</hi></q>&mdash;man had immortality of soul, and now, lest to this he
add immortality of body, he is expelled from the tree of life. <hi rend='italic'>Eccl. 12:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the dust returneth
to the earth as it was, and the spirit returneth unto God who gave it</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Zech. 12:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Jehovah, who stretcheth forth
the heavens, and layeth the foundation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 10:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And be not afraid of them that kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him who
is able to destroy both soul and body in hell</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 7:59</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And they stoned Stephen, calling upon the Lord, and
saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit</hi></q>: <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 12:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago (whether in the
body, I know not; or whether out of the body, I know not; God knoweth), such a one caught up even to the third
heaven</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:45, 46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The first man Adam became a living soul. The last Adam became a life-giving spirit.
Howbeit that is not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; then that which is spiritual</hi></q>&mdash;the first
<pb n='992'/><anchor id='Pg992'/>
Adam was made a being whose body was psychical and mortal&mdash;a body of flesh and
blood, that could not inherit the kingdom of God. So Paul says the spiritual is not
first, but the psychical; but there is no intimation that the soul also was created
mortal, and needed external appliances, like the tree of life, before it could enter upon
immortality.
</p>

<p>
But it may be asked: Is not all this, in <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15</hi>, spoken of the regenerate&mdash;those to
whom a new principle of life has been communicated? We answer, yes; but that does
not prevent us from learning from the passage the natural immortality of the soul; for
in regeneration the essence is not changed, no new substance is imparted, no new
faculty or constitutive element is added, and no new principle of holiness is infused.
The truth is simply that the spirit is morally readjusted. For substance of the above
remarks, see Hovey, State of Impenitent Dead, 1-27.
</p>

<p>
Savage, Life after Death, 46, 53&mdash;<q>The word translated <q>soul</q>, in <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 2:7</hi>, is the
same word which in other parts of the O. T. is used to denote the life-principle of
animals. It does not follow that soul implies immortality, for then all animals would
be immortal.... The firmament of the Hebrews was the cover of a dinner-platter,
solid, but with little windows to let the rain through. Above this firmament was
heaven where God and angels abode, but no people went there. All went below. But
growing moral sense held that the good could not be imprisoned in Hades. So came the
idea of resurrection.... If a <emph>force</emph>, a universe with God left out, can do all that has
been done, I do not see why it cannot also continue my existence through what is
called death.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. H. Heath Bawden: <q>It is only the creature that is born that will die. Monera
and Amœbæ are immortal, as Weismann tells us. They do not die, because they never
are born. The death of the individual as a somatic individual is for the sake of the
larger future life of the individual in its germinal immortality. So we live ourselves
spiritually into our children, as well as physically. An organism is nothing but a
centre or focus through which the world surges. What matter if the irrelevant somatic
portion is lost in what we call death! The only immortality possible is the immortality
of function. My body has changed completely since I was a boy, but I have become a
larger self thereby. Birth and death simply mark steps or stages in the growth of
such an individual, which in its very nature does not exclude but rather includes
within it the lives of all other individuals. The individual is more than a passive member,
he is an active organ of a biological whole. The laws of his life are the social
organism functioning in one of its organs. He lives and moves and has his being in the
great spirit of the whole, which comes to a focus or flowers out in his conscious life.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The account of the curse in Genesis, and the subsequent allusions to
it in Scripture, show that, while the death then incurred includes the dissolution
of the body, it does not include cessation of being on the part of
the soul, but only designates that state of the soul which is the opposite
of true life, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>, a state of banishment from God, of unholiness, and of
misery.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gen. 2:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>3:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the man and his wife hid
themselves from the presence of Jehovah God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>16-19</hi>&mdash;the curse of pain and toil: <hi rend='italic'>22-24</hi>&mdash;banishment
from the garden of Eden and from the tree of life. <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 8:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Follow me; and leave the dead
to bury their own dead</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>25:41, 46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Depart from me, ye cursed, into the eternal fire.... These shall go away
into eternal punishment</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 15:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>John 5:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that heareth my word, and believeth him that sent me, hath eternal life, and cometh not into judgment,
but hath passed out of death into life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>6:47, 53, 63</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that believeth hath eternal life.... Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have not life in yourselves.... the words that I have spoken unto
you are spirit, and are life</hi></q>: <hi rend='italic'>8:51</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If a man keep my word, he shall never see death.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 5:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that, as sin reigned in death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>8:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if ye live after the flesh, ye must die; but if by the Spirit ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>dead through your trespasses and sins</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead,
and Christ shall shine upon thee</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>James 5:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he who converteth a sinner from the error of his way shall save a
soul from death, and shall cover a multitude of sins</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 3:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We know that we have passed out of death into
life, because we love the brethren</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 3:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and thou
art dead.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
We are to interpret O. T. terms by the N. T. meaning put into them. We are to
interpret the Hebrew by the Greek, not the Greek by the Hebrew. It never would do to
<pb n='993'/><anchor id='Pg993'/>
interpret our missionaries' use of the Chinese words for <q>God</q>, <q>spirit</q>, <q>holiness</q>,
by the use of those words among the Chinese before the missionaries came. By the
later usage of the N. T., the Holy Spirit shows us what he meant by the usage of the
O. T.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The Scriptural expressions, held by annihilationists to imply cessation
of being on the part of the wicked, are used not only in connections
where they cannot bear this meaning (Esther 4:16), but in connections
where they imply the opposite.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Esther 4:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if I perish, I perish</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 6:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the earth was corrupt before God</hi></q>&mdash;here, in the
LXX, the word ἐφθάρη, translated <q><hi rend='italic'>was corrupt</hi>,</q> is the same word which in other places is
interpreted by annihilationists as meaning extinction of being. In <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 119:176</hi>, <q><hi rend='italic'>I have gone
astray like a lost sheep</hi></q> cannot mean <q>I have gone astray like an annihilated sheep.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Is. 49:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>thy
destroyers</hi> [annihilators?] <hi rend='italic'>and they that made thee waste shall go forth from thee</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>57:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The
righteous perisheth</hi> [is annihilated?] <hi rend='italic'>and no man layeth it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. He entereth into peace; they rest in their beds, each
one that walketh in his uprightness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Dan. 9:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And after the three score and two weeks shall the anointed one be
cut off</hi> [annihilated?].</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 10:6, 39, 42</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the lost sheep of the house of Israel ... he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it ...
he shall in no wise lose his reward</hi></q>&mdash;in these verses we cannot substitute <q>annihilate</q> for
<q><hi rend='italic'>lose</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 13:41</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 6:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>for they disfigure their
faces</hi></q>&mdash;where the same word ἀφανίζω is used. <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 3:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If any man destroyeth</hi> [annihilates?]
<hi rend='italic'>the temple of God, him shall God destroy</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 7:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>we corrupted no man</hi></q>&mdash;where the same
word φθείρω is used. <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 1:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who shall suffer punishment, even eternal destruction from the face of
the Lord and from the glory of his might</hi></q> = the wicked shall be driven out from the presence of
Christ. Destruction is not annihilation. <q><hi rend='italic'>Destruction from</hi></q> = separation; (<hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>, see
Prof. W. A. Stevens, Com. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>: <q><hi rend='italic'>from</hi></q> = the source from which the <q><hi rend='italic'>destruction</hi></q> proceeds).
<q>A ship engulfed in quicksands is destroyed; a temple broken down and
deserted is destroyed</q>; see Lillie, Com. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 3:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>day of judgment and destruction of
ungodly men</hi></q>&mdash;here the word <q><hi rend='italic'>destruction</hi></q> (ἀπωλείας) is the same with that used of the end
of the present order of things, and translated <q><hi rend='italic'>perished</hi></q> (ἀπώλετο) in <hi rend='italic'>verse 6</hi>. <q>We cannot
accordingly infer from it that the ungodly will cease to exist, but only that there will
be a great and penal change in their condition</q> (Plumptre, Com. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The passages held to prove the annihilation of the wicked at death
cannot have this meaning, since the Scriptures foretell a resurrection of the
unjust as well as of the just; and a second death, or a misery of the reunited
soul and body, in the case of the wicked.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 24:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>there shall be a resurrection both of the just and unjust</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 2:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that overcometh shall not
be hurt of the second death</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>20:14, 15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second
death, even the lake of fire. And if any was not found written in the book of life, he was cast into the lake of fire</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>21:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>their part shall be in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone; which is the second death.</hi></q> The
<q><hi rend='italic'>second death</hi></q> is the first death intensified. Having one's <q><hi rend='italic'>part in the lake of fire</hi></q> is not annihilation.
</p>

<p>
In a similar manner the word <q><hi rend='italic'>life</hi></q> is to be interpreted not as meaning continuance
of being, but as meaning perfection of being. As death is the loss not of life, but of all
that makes life desirable, so life is the possession of the highest good. <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 5:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>She
that giveth herself to pleasure is dead while she liveth</hi></q>&mdash;here the death is spiritual death, and it is
implied that true life is spiritual life. <hi rend='italic'>John 10:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I came that they may have life, and may have it
abundantly</hi></q>&mdash;implies that <q><hi rend='italic'>life</hi></q> <emph>is not</emph>: 1. mere existence, for they had this before Christ
came; nor 2. mere motion, as squirrels go in a wheel, without making progress; nor 3.
mere possessions, <q><hi rend='italic'>for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of things which he possesseth</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:15</hi>).
But life <emph>is</emph>: 1. right relation of our powers, or holiness; 2. right use of our powers,
or love; 3. right number of our powers, or completeness; 4. right intensity of our
powers, or energy of will; 5. right environment of our powers, or society; 6. right
source of our powers, or God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The words used in Scripture to denote the place of departed spirits
have in them no implication of annihilation, and the allusions to the condition
of the departed show that death, to the writers of the Old and the New
<pb n='994'/><anchor id='Pg994'/>
Testaments, although it was the termination of man's earthly existence,
was not an extinction of his being or his consciousness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On שאול Sheol, Gesenius, Lexicon, 10th ed., says that, though שאול is commonly
explained as infinitive of שאל, to demand, it is undoubtedly allied to שעל (root של),
to be sunk, and = <q>sinking,</q> <q>depth,</q> or <q>the sunken, deep, place.</q> Ἁιδης, Hades, = not
<q>hell,</q> but the <q>unseen world,</q> conceived by the Greeks as a shadowy, but not as an
unconscious, state of being. Genung, Epic of the Inner Life, on <hi rend='italic'>Job 7:9</hi>&mdash;<q>Sheol, the
Hebrew word designating the unseen abode of the dead; a neutral word, presupposing
neither misery nor happiness, and not infrequently used much as we use the word <q>the
grave</q>, to denote the final undefined resting-place of all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gen. 25:8, 9</hi>&mdash;Abraham <q><hi rend='italic'>was gathered to his people. And Isaac and Ishmael his sons buried him in the cave
of Machpelah.</hi></q> <q>Yet Abraham's father was buried in Haran, and his more remote ancestors
in Ur of the Chaldees. So Joshua's generation is said to be <q><hi rend='italic'>gathered to their fathers</hi></q>
though the generation that preceded them perished in the wilderness, and previous
generations died in Egypt</q> (W. H. Green, in S. S. Times). So of Isaac in <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 35:29</hi>, and
of Jacob in <hi rend='italic'>19:29, 33</hi>,&mdash;all of whom were gathered to their fathers before they were buried.
<hi rend='italic'>Num. 20:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Aaron shall be gathered unto his people</hi></q>&mdash;here it is very plain that being <q><hi rend='italic'>gathered
unto his people</hi></q> was something different from burial. <hi rend='italic'>Deut. 10:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>There Aaron died, and there he was
buried.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Job 3:13, 18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For now should I have lain down and been quiet; I should have slept; then had I been at
rest.... There the prisoners are at ease together; They hear not the voice of the taskmaster</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>7:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>As the cloud
is consumed and vanisheth away, So he that goeth down to Sheol shall come up no more</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>14:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But his flesh upon
him hath pain, And his soul within him mourneth.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ez. 32:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The strong among the mighty shall speak to him out of the midst of Sheol</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 16:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And in
Hades he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>23:43</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>To-day
shalt thou be with me in Paradise</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 Sam. 28:19</hi>&mdash;Samuel said to Saul in the cave of Endor:
<q><hi rend='italic'>to-morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me</hi></q>&mdash;evidently not in an unconscious state. Many
of these passages intimate a continuity of consciousness after death. Though Sheol is
unknown to man, it is naked and open to God (<hi rend='italic'>Job 26:6</hi>); he can find men there to
redeem them from thence (<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 49:15</hi>)&mdash;proof that death is not annihilation. See Girdlestone,
O. T. Synonyms, 447.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) The terms and phrases which have been held to declare absolute
cessation of existence at death are frequently metaphorical, and an examination
of them in connection with the context and with other Scriptures is
sufficient to show the untenableness of the literal interpretation put upon
them by the annihilationists, and to prove that the language is merely the
language of appearance.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Death is often designated as a <q><emph>sleeping</emph></q> or a <q><emph>falling asleep</emph></q>; see <hi rend='italic'>John 11:11, 14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Our friend
Lazarus is fallen asleep; but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep.... Then Jesus therefore said unto them
plainly, Lazarus is dead.</hi></q> Here the language of appearance is used; yet this language could
not have been used, if the soul had not been conceived of as alive, though sundered
from the body; see Meyer on <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:18</hi>. So the language of appearance is used in <hi rend='italic'>Eccl.
9:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in Sheol whither thou goest</hi></q>&mdash;and in <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 146:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>His
breath goeth forth; he returneth to his earth; In that very day his thoughts perish.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
See Mozley, Essays, 2:171&mdash;<q>These passages often describe the phenomena of death
as it presents itself to our eyes, and so do not enter into the reality which takes place
beneath it.</q> Bartlett, Life and Death Eternal, 189-358&mdash;<q>Because the same Hebrew
word is used for <q>spirit</q> and <q>breath,</q> shall we say that the spirit is only breath?
<q>Heart</q> in English might in like manner be made to mean only the material organ; and
David's heart, panting, thirsting, melting within him, would have to be interpreted
literally. So a man may be <q>eaten up with avarice,</q> while yet his being is not only not
extinct, but is in a state of frightful activity.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) The Jewish belief in a conscious existence after death is proof that
the theory of annihilation rests upon a misinterpretation of Scripture.
That such a belief in the immortality of the soul existed among the Jews is
abundantly evident: from the knowledge of a future state possessed by the
Egyptians (Acts 7:22); from the accounts of the translation of Enoch and
<pb n='995'/><anchor id='Pg995'/>
of Elijah (Gen. 5:24; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Heb. 11:5; 2 K. 2:11); from the invocation
of the dead which was practised, although forbidden by the law (1 Sam.
28:7-14; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Lev. 20:28; Deut. 18:10, 11); from allusions in the O. T.
to resurrection, future retribution, and life beyond the grave (Job
19:25-27; Ps. 16:9-11; Is. 26:19; Ez. 37:1-14; Dan. 12:2, 3, 13);
and from distinct declarations of such faith by Philo and Josephus, as well
as by the writers of the N. T. (Mat. 22:31, 32; Acts 23:6; 26:6-8;
Heb. 11:13-16).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Egyptian coffin was called <q>the chest of the living.</q> The Egyptians called their
houses <q>hostelries,</q> while their tombs they called their <q>eternal homes</q> (Butcher,
Aspects of Greek Genius, 30). See the Book of the Dead, translated by Birch, in Bunsen's
Egypt's Place, 123-333: The principal ideas of the first part of the Book of the Dead are
<q>living again after death, and being born again as the sun,</q> which typified the Egyptian
resurrection (138). <q>The deceased lived again after death</q> (134). <q>The Osiris
lives after he dies, like the sun daily; for as the sun died and was born yesterday, so
the Osiris is born</q> (164). Yet the immortal part, in its continued existence, was
dependent for its blessedness upon the preservation of the body; and for this reason the
body was embalmed. Immortality of the body is as important as the passage of the
soul to the upper regions. Growth or natural reparation of the body is invoked as
earnestly as the passage of the soul. <q>There is not a limb of him without a god;
Thoth is vivifying his limbs</q> (197).
</p>

<p>
Maspero, Recueil de Travaux, gives the following readings from the inner walls of
pyramids twelve miles south of Cairo: <q>O Unas, thou hast gone away dead, but living</q>;
<q>Teti is the living dead</q>; <q>Arise, O Teti, to die no more</q>; <q>O Pepi, thou diest
no more</q>;&mdash;these inscriptions show that to the Egyptians there was life beyond
death. <q>The life of Unas is duration; his period is eternity</q>; <q>They render thee
happy throughout all eternity</q>; <q>He who has given thee life and eternity is Ra</q>;&mdash;here
we see that the life beyond death was eternal. <q>Rising at his pleasure, gathering
his members that are in the tomb, Unas goes forth</q>; <q>Unas has his heart, his legs, his
arms</q>; this asserts reunion with the body. <q>Reunited to thy soul, thou takest thy
place among the stars of heaven</q>; <q>the soul is thine within thee</q>;&mdash;there was
reunion with the soul. <q>A god is born, it is Unas</q>; <q>O Ra, thy son comes to thee,
this Unas comes to thee</q>; <q>O Father of Unas, grant that he may be included in the
number of the perfect and wise gods</q>; here it is taught that the reunited soul and
body becomes a god and dwells with the gods.
</p>

<p>
Howard Osgood: <q>Osiris, the son of gods, came to live on earth. His life was a pattern
for others. He was put to death by the god of evil, but regained his body, lived
again, and became, in the other world, the judge of all men.</q> Tiele, Egyptian Religion,
280&mdash;<q>To become like god Osiris, a benefactor, a good being, persecuted but justified,
judged but pronounced innocent, was looked upon as the ideal of every pious man, and
as the condition on which alone eternal life could be obtained, and as the means by
which it could be continued.</q> Ebers, Études Archéologiques, 21&mdash;<q>The texts in the
pyramids show us that under the Pharaohs of the 5th dynasty (before 2500 B. C.) the
doctrine that the deceased became god was not only extant, but was developed more
thoroughly and with far higher flight of imagination than we could expect from the
simple statements concerning the other world hitherto known to us as from that early
time.</q> Revillout, on Egyptian Ethics, in Bib. Sac., July, 1890:304&mdash;<q>An almost absolute
sinlessness was for the Egyptian the condition of becoming another Osiris and
enjoying eternal happiness. Of the penitential side, so highly developed in the ancient
Babylonians and Hebrews, which gave rise to so many admirable penitential psalms,
we find only a trace among the Egyptians. Sinlessness is the rule,&mdash;the deceased
vaunts himself as a hero of virtue.</q> See Uarda, by Ebers; Dr. Howard Osgood, on
Resurrection among the Egyptians, in Hebrew Student, Feb. 1885. The Egyptians,
however, recognized no transmigration of souls; see Renouf, Hibbert Lectures,
181-184.
</p>

<p>
It is morally impossible that Moses should not have known the Egyptian doctrine of
immortality: <hi rend='italic'>Acts 7:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians.</hi></q> That Moses did
not make the doctrine more prominent in his teachings, may be for the reason that it
was so connected with Egyptian superstitions with regard to Osiris. Yet the Jews
believed in immortality: <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 5:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him</hi></q>;
<pb n='996'/><anchor id='Pg996'/>
<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 11:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Kings 2:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Elijah went up by
a whirlwind into heaven</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Sam. 28:7-14</hi>&mdash;the invocation of Samuel by the woman of Endor;
<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Lev. 20:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>A man also or a woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to
death</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Deut. 18:10, 11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>There shall not be found with thee ... a consulter with a familiar spirit, or a wizard,
or a necromancer.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Job 19:25-27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I know that my Redeemer liveth, And at last he will stand up upon the earth: And after my skin,
even this body, is destroyed, Then without my flesh shall I see God; Whom I, even I, shall see, on my side, And mine
eyes shall behold, and not as a stranger. My heart is consumed within me</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 16:9-11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Therefore my heart is
glad, and my glory rejoiceth: My flesh also shall dwell in safety. For thou wilt not leave my soul to Sheol; Neither
wilt thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Thou wilt show me the path of life: In thy presence is fulness of joy;
In thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Is. 26:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Thy dead shalt live; my dead bodies shall arise.
Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast forth the dead</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Ez. 37:1-14</hi>&mdash;the valley of dry bones&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your
graves, O my people</hi></q>&mdash;a prophecy of restoration based upon the idea of immortality and
resurrection; <hi rend='italic'>Dan. 12:2, 3, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.... But go thou thy way till the
end be: for thou shalt rest, and shalt stand in thy lot, at the end of the days.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Josephus, on the doctrine of the Pharisees, in Antiquities, XVIII:1:3, and Wars of
the Jews, II:8:10-14&mdash;<q>Souls have an immortal vigor. Under the earth are rewards
and punishments. The wicked are detained in an everlasting prison. The righteous
shall have power to revive and live again. Bodies are indeed corruptible, but souls
remain exempt from death forever. But the doctrine of the Sadducees is that souls
die with their bodies.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 22:31, 32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that
which was spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Christ's argument, in the passage last quoted, rests upon the two implied assumptions:
first, that love will never suffer the object of its affection to die; beings who have
ever been the objects of God's love will be so forever; secondly, that body and soul
belong normally together; if body and soul are temporarily separated, they shall be
united; Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are living, and therefore they shall rise again. It
was only an application of the same principle, when Robert Hall gave up his early
materialism as he looked down into his father's grave: he felt that this could not be
the end; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 22:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Your heart shall live forever.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 23:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees:
touching the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>26:7, 8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And concerning this hope I am
accused by the Jews, O king! Why is it judged incredible with you, if God doth raise the dead?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 11:13-16</hi>&mdash;the
present life was reckoned as a pilgrimage; the patriarchs sought <q><hi rend='italic'>a better country, that
is, a heavenly</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 47:9</hi>. On Jesus' argument for the resurrection, see A. H. Strong,
Christ in Creation, 406-421.
</p>

<p>
The argument for immortality itself presupposes, not only the existence of a God,
but the existence of a truthful, wise, and benevolent God. We might almost say that
God and immortality must be proved together,&mdash;like two pieces of a broken crock,
when put together there is proof of both. And yet logically it is only the existence
of God that is intuitively certain. Immortality is an inference therefrom. Henry
More: <q>But souls that of his own good life partake He loves as his own self; dear as his
eye They are to him: he'll never them forsake; When they shall die, then God himself
shall die; They live, they live in blest eternity.</q> God could not let Christ die, and he
cannot let us die. Southey: <q>They sin who tell us love can die. With life all other
passions fly; All others are but vanity. In heaven ambition cannot dwell, Nor avarice
in the vaults of hell; They perish where they had their birth; But love is indestructible.</q>
</p>

<p>
Emerson, Threnody on the death of his beloved and gifted child: <q>What is excellent,
As God lives, is permanent: Hearts are dust, hearts' loves remain; Heart's love will
meet thee again.</q> Whittier, Snowbound, 200 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>&mdash;<q>Yet Love will dream, and Faith will
trust (Since He who knows our need is just), That somehow, somewhere, meet we must.
Alas for him who never sees The stars shine through his cypress trees! Who hopeless lays
his dead away, Nor looks to see the breaking day Across his mournful marbles play!
Who hath not learned, in hours of faith, The truth to flesh and sense unknown, That Life
is ever lord of death, And Love can never lose its own.</q> Robert Browning, Evelyn
Hope: <q>For God above Is great to grant as mighty to make, And creates the love to
reward the love; I claim you still for my own love's sake! Delayed it may be for more
lives yet, Through worlds I shall traverse not a few; Much is to learn and much to forget,
Ere the time be come for taking you.</q>
</p>

<pb n='997'/><anchor id='Pg997'/>

<p>
The river St. John in New Brunswick descends seventeen feet between the city and
the sea, and ships cannot overcome the obstacle, but when the tide comes in, it turns
the current the other way and bears vessels on mightily to the city. So the laws of
nature bring death, but the tides of Christ's life counteract them, and bring life and
immortality (Dr. J. W. A. Stewart). Mozley, Lectures, 26-59, and Essays, 2:169&mdash;<q>True
religion among the Jews had an evidence of immortality in its possession of
God. Paganism was hopeless in its loss of friends, because affection never advanced
beyond its earthly object, and therefore, in losing it, lost all. But religious love, which
loves the creature in the Creator, has that on which to fall back, when its earthly
object is removed.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>h</hi>) The most impressive and conclusive of all proofs of immortality,
however, is afforded in the resurrection of Jesus Christ,&mdash;a work accomplished
by his own power, and demonstrating that the spirit lived after its
separation from the body (John 2:19, 21; 10:17, 18). By coming back
from the tomb, he proves that death is not annihilation (2 Tim. 1:10).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 2:19, 21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up....
But he spake of the temple of his body</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>10:17, 18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Therefore doth the Father love me, because I lay down my life,
that I may take it again.... I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 1:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>our
Savior Christ Jesus, who abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel</hi></q>&mdash;that
is, immortality had been a truth dimly recognized, suspected, longed for, before Christ
came; but it was he who first brought it out from obscurity and uncertainty into clear
daylight and convincing power. Christ's resurrection, moreover, carries with it the
resurrection of his people: <q>We two are so joined, He'll not be in glory and leave me
behind.</q>
</p>

<p>
Christ taught immortality: (1) By exhibiting himself the perfect conception of a
human life. Who could believe that Christ could become forever extinct? (2) By
actually coming back from beyond the grave. There were many speculations about a
trans-Atlantic continent before 1492, but these were of little worth compared with the
actual word which Columbus brought of a new world beyond the sea. (3) By providing
a way through which his own spiritual life and victory may be ours; so that,
though we pass through the valley of the shadow of death, we may fear no evil. (4)
By thus gaining authority to teach us of the resurrection of the righteous and of the
wicked, as he actually does. Christ's resurrection is not only the best proof of immortality,
but we have no certain evidence of immortality without it. Hume held that the
same logic which proved immortality from reason alone, would also prove preëxistence.
<q>In reality,</q> he said, <q>it is the Gospel, and the Gospel alone, that has brought
immortality to light.</q> It was truth, though possibly spoken in jest.
</p>

<p>
There was need of this revelation. The fear of death, even after Christ has come,
shows how hopeless humanity is by nature. Krupp, the great German maker of cannon,
would not have death mentioned in his establishment. He ran away from his own
dying relatives. Yet he died. But to the Christian, death is an exodus, an unmooring,
a home-coming. Here we are as ships on the stocks; at death we are launched
into our true element. Before Christ's resurrection, it was twilight; it is sunrise
now. Balfour: <q>Death is the fall of the curtain, not at the end of the piece, but
at the end of the act.</q> George Dana Boardman: <q>Christ is the resurrection and the
life. Being himself the Son of man&mdash;the archetypal man, the representative of human
nature, the head and epitome of mankind&mdash;mankind ideally, potentially, virtually
rose, when the Son of man rose. He is the resurrection, because he is the life. The
body does not give life to itself, but life takes on body and uses it.</q>
</p>

<p>
George Adam Smith, Yale Lectures: <q>Some of the Psalmists have only a hope of
corporate immortality. But this was found wanting. It did not satisfy Israel. It cannot
satisfy men to-day. The O. T. is of use in reminding us that the hope of immortality
is a secondary, subordinate, and dispensable element of religious experience. Men had
better begin and work for God's sake, and not for future reward. The O. T. development
of immortality is of use most of all because it deduces all immortality from
God.</q> Athanasius: <q>Man is, according to nature, mortal, as a being who has
been made of things that are perishable. But on account of his likeness to God
he can by piety ward off and escape from his natural mortality and remain indestructible
if he retain the knowledge of God, or lose his incorruptibility if he
lose his life in God</q> (quoted in McConnell, Evolution of Immortality, viii, 46-48).
Justin Martyr, 1 Apol., 17, expects resurrection of both just and unjust; but in Dial.
<pb n='998'/><anchor id='Pg998'/>
Tryph., 5, he expressly denounces and dismisses the Platonic doctrine that the soul is
immortal. Athenagoras and Tertullian hold to native immortality, and from it argue
to bodily resurrection. So Augustine. But Theophilus, Irenæus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
with Athanasius, counted it a pagan error. For the annihilation theory, see
Hudson, Debt and Grace, and Christ our Life; also Dobney, Future Punishment. <hi rend='italic'>Per
contra</hi>, see Hovey, State of the Impenitent Dead, 1-27, and Manual of Theology and
Ethics, 153-168; Luthardt, Compendium, 289-292; Delitzsch, Bib. Psych., 397-407; Herzog,
Encyclop., art.: Tod; Splittgerber, Schlaf und Tod; Estes, Christian Doctrine of the
Soul; Baptist Review, 1879:411-439; Presb. Rev., Jan. 1882:203.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Intermediate State.</head>

<p>
The Scriptures affirm the conscious existence of both the righteous and
the wicked, after death, and prior to the resurrection. In the intermediate
state the soul is without a body, yet this state is for the righteous a state
of conscious joy, and for the wicked a state of conscious suffering.
</p>

<p>
That the righteous do not receive the spiritual body at death, is plain
from 1 Thess. 4:16,17 and 1 Cor. 15:52, where an interval is intimated
between Paul's time and the rising of those who slept. The rising was to
occur in the future, <q>at the last trump.</q> So the resurrection of the
wicked had not yet occurred in any single case (2 Tim. 2:18&mdash;it was an
error to say that the resurrection was <q>past already</q>); it was yet future
(John 5:28-30&mdash;<q>the hour cometh</q>&mdash;ἔρχεται ὤρα, not καὶ νῦν ἐστίν&mdash;<q>now
is,</q> as in verse 25; Acts 24:15&mdash;<q>there shall be a resurrection</q>&mdash;ἀνάστασιν
μέλλειν ἔσεσθαι). Christ was the firstfruits (1 Cor. 15:20, 23). If
the saints had received the spiritual body at death, the patriarchs would
have been raised before Christ.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Of the righteous.</head>

<p>
Of the righteous, it is declared:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That the soul of the believer, at its separation from the body,
enters the presence of Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:1-8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if the earthly house of our tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building from God, a house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens. For verily in this we groan, longing to be clothed upon with our habitation which
is from heaven: if so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked. For indeed we that are in this tabernacle do
groan, being burdened; not for that we would be unclothed, but that we would be clothed upon, that what is mortal
may be swallowed up of life ... willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be at home with the Lord</hi></q>&mdash;Paul
hopes to escape the violent separation of soul and body&mdash;the being <q><emph>unclothed</emph></q>&mdash;by
living till the coming of the Lord, and then putting on the heavenly body, as it were,
over the present one (ἐπενδύσασθαι); yet whether he lived till Christ's coming or not,
he knew that the soul, when it left the body, would be at home with the Lord.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 23:43</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 14:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And if I go and prepare a place for you,
I come again, and will receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 4:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The Lord
will deliver me from every evil work, and will save me unto</hi> [or, <q><hi rend='italic'>into</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>his heavenly kingdom</hi></q> = will save me
and put me into his heavenly kingdom (Ellicott), the characteristic of which is the
visible presence of the King with his subjects. It is our privilege to be with Christ
here and now. And nothing shall separate us from Christ and his love, <q><hi rend='italic'>neither death, nor
life ... nor things present, nor things to come</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:38</hi>); for he himself has said: <q><hi rend='italic'>Lo, I am with
you always, even unto the consummation of the age</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:20</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the spirits of departed believers are with God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 12:23</hi>&mdash;Ye are come <q><hi rend='italic'>to the general assembly and church of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven,
and to God the Judge of all</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Eccl. 12:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the dust returneth to the earth as it was, and the spirit returneth unto
God who gave it</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 20:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended unto the Father</hi></q>&mdash;probably means:
<q>my body has not yet ascended.</q> The soul had gone to God during the interval
between death and the resurrection, as is evident from <hi rend='italic'>Luke 23:43, 46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>with me in Paradise
... Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That believers at death enter paradise.
</p>

<pb n='999'/><anchor id='Pg999'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 23:42, 43</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And he said, Jesus, remember me when thou comest in thy kingdom. And he said unto him,
Verily I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 12:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>caught up into Paradise, and
heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 2:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>To him that overcometh, to him
will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the Paradise of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 2:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And Jehovah God planted a garden
eastward, in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.</hi></q> Paradise is none other than the
abode of God and the blessed, of which the primeval Eden was the type. If the penitent
thief went to Purgatory, it was a Purgatory with Christ, which was better than a
Heaven without Christ. Paradise is a place which Christ has gone to prepare, perhaps
by taking our friends there before us.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) That their state, immediately after death, is greatly to be preferred
to that of faithful and successful laborers for Christ here.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I am in a strait betwixt the two, having the desire to depart and be with Christ; for it is very far
better</hi></q>&mdash;here Hackett says: <q>ἀναλῦσαι = departing, cutting loose, as if to put to sea, followed
by σὺν Χριστῷ εἶναι, as if Paul regarded one event as immediately subsequent to
the other.</q> Paul, with his burning desire to preach Christ, would certainly have preferred
to live and labor, even amid great suffering, rather than to die, if death to him
had been a state of unconsciousness and inaction. See Edwards the younger, Works,
2:530, 531; Hovey, Impenitent Dead, 61.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) That departed saints are truly alive and conscious.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 22:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God is not the God of the dead, but of the living</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 16:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>carried away by the angels into
Abraham's bosom</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>23:43</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise</hi></q>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>with me</hi></q> = in the same state,&mdash;unless
Christ slept in unconsciousness, we cannot think that the penitent thief did;
<hi rend='italic'>John 11:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whosoever liveth and believeth on me shall never die</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 5:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who died for us, that,
whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And if Christ is in you, the body is
dead because of sin; but the spirit is life because of righteousness.</hi></q> Life and consciousness clearly
belong to the <q><hi rend='italic'>souls under the altar</hi></q> mentioned under the next head, for they cry: <q><hi rend='italic'>How
long?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 1:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he who began a good work in you will perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ</hi></q>&mdash;seems to
imply a progressive sanctification, through the Intermediate State, up to the time of
Christ's second coming. This state is: 1. a conscious state (<q><hi rend='italic'>God of the living</hi></q>); 2. a fixed
state (no <q><hi rend='italic'>passing from thence</hi></q>); 3. an incomplete state (<q><hi rend='italic'>not to be unclothed</hi></q>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) That they are at rest and blessed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 6:9-11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I saw underneath the altar the souls of them that had been slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they held: and they cried with a great voice, saying, How long, O Master, the holy and true, dost thou not
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? And there was given them to each one a white robe; and
it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little time, until their fellow-servants also and their brethren, who
should be killed even as they were, should have fulfilled their course</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>14:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Blessed are the dead who die in the
Lord from henceforth: yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors; for their works follow with
them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>20:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire</hi></q>&mdash;see Evans, in Presb. Rev., 1883:303&mdash;<q>The
shadow of death lying upon Hades is the penumbra of Hell. Hence Hades
is associated with death in the final doom.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Of the wicked.</head>

<p>
Of the wicked, it is declared:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That they are in prison,&mdash;that is, are under constraint and guard
(1 Peter 3:19&mdash;φυλακή).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 3:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>In which</hi> [spirit] <hi rend='italic'>also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison</hi></q>&mdash;there is no need
of putting unconscious spirits under guard. Hovey: <q>Restraint implies power of
action, and suffering implies consciousness.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That they are in torment, or conscious suffering (Luke 16:23&mdash;ἐν
βασάνοις).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 16:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And in Hades he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his
bosom. And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his
finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am in anguish in this flame.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Here many unanswerable questions may be asked: Had the rich man a body before
the resurrection, or is this representation of a body only figurative? Did the soul still
feel the body from which it was temporarily separated, or have souls in the intermediate
state temporary bodies? However we may answer these questions, it is certain
<pb n='1000'/><anchor id='Pg1000'/>
that the rich man suffers, while probation still lasts for his brethren on earth. Fire is
here the source of suffering, but not of annihilation. Even though this be a parable, it
proves conscious existence after death to have been the common view of the Jews, and
to have been a view sanctioned by Christ.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That they are under punishment (2 Pet. 2:9&mdash;κολαζομένους).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 2:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to keep the unrighteous under punishment
unto the day of judgment</hi></q>&mdash;here <q><hi rend='italic'>the unrighteous</hi></q> = not only evil angels, but ungodly men; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>verse 4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For if God spared not angels when they sinned, but cast them down to hell, and committed them to pits of
darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
In the parable of the rich man and Lazarus, the body is buried, yet still the torments
of the soul are described as physical. Jesus here accommodates his teaching to the
conceptions of his time, or, better still, uses material figures to express spiritual realities.
Surely he does not mean to say that the Rabbinic notion of Abraham's bosom is
ultimate truth. <q>Parables,</q> for this reason among others, <q>may not be made primary
sources and seats of doctrine.</q> Luckock, Intermediate State, 20&mdash;<q>May the parable
of the rich man and Lazarus be an anticipatory picture of the final state? But the rich
man seems to assume that the judgment has not yet come, for he speaks of his brethren
as still undergoing their earthly probation, and as capable of receiving a warning to
avoid a fate similar to his own.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The passages cited enable us properly to estimate two opposite errors.
</p>

<p>
A. They refute, on the one hand, the view that the souls of both righteous
and wicked sleep between death and the resurrection.
</p>

<p>
This view is based upon the assumption that the possession of a physical
organism is indispensable to activity and consciousness&mdash;an assumption
which the existence of a God who is pure spirit (John 4:24), and the
existence of angels who are probably pure spirits (Heb. 1:14), show to be
erroneous. Although the departed are characterized as <q>spirits</q> (Eccl. 12:7;
Acts 7:59; Heb. 12:23; 1 Pet. 3:19), there is nothing in this 'absence
from the body' (2 Cor. 5:8) inconsistent with the activity and consciousness
ascribed to them in the Scriptures above referred to. When the dead
are spoken of as <q>sleeping</q> (Dan. 12:2; Mat. 9:24; John 11:11; 1 Cor.
11:30; 15:51; 1 Thess. 4:14; 5:10), we are to regard this as simply the
language of appearance, and as literally applicable only to the body.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 4:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God is a Spirit</hi> [or rather, as margin, <q><hi rend='italic'>God is spirit</hi></q>]</q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 1:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Are they</hi> [angels]
<hi rend='italic'>not all ministering spirits?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Eccl. 12:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the dust returneth to the earth as it was, and the spirit returneth unto
God who gave it</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 7:59</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And they stoned Stephen, calling upon the Lord, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 12:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 3:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in which
also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>we are of good courage, I say, and are willing rather
to be absent from the body, and to be at home with the Lord</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Dan. 12:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>many of them that sleep in the dust of the
earth shall awake</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 9:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 11:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Our friend Lazarus is fallen
asleep; but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 11:30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For this cause many among you are weak and
sickly, and not a few sleep</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 4:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also that
are fallen asleep in Jesus will God bring with him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should
live together with him.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The passages first cited refute, on the other hand, the view that the
suffering of the intermediate state is purgatorial.
</p>

<p>
According to the doctrine of the Roman Catholic church, <q>all who die
at peace with the church, but are not perfect, pass into purgatory.</q> Here
they make satisfaction for the sins committed after baptism by suffering a
longer or shorter time, according to the degree of their guilt. The church
on earth, however, has power, by prayers and the sacrifice of the Mass, to
shorten these sufferings or to remit them altogether. But we urge, in
reply, that the passages referring to suffering in the intermediate state give
<pb n='1001'/><anchor id='Pg1001'/>
no indication that any true believer is subject to this suffering, or that the
church has any power to relieve from the consequences of sin, either in this
world or in the world to come. Only God can forgive, and the church is
simply empowered to declare that, upon the fulfilment of the appointed
conditions of repentance and faith, he does actually forgive. This theory,
moreover, is inconsistent with any proper view of the completeness of
Christ's satisfaction (Gal. 2:21; Heb. 9:28); of justification through faith
alone (Rom. 3:28); and of the condition after death, of both righteous
and wicked, as determined in this life (Eccl. 11:3; Mat. 25:10; Luke 16:26;
Heb. 9:27; Rev.22:11).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Against this doctrine we quote the following texts: <hi rend='italic'>Gal 2:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I do not make void the grace
of God: for if righteousness is through the law, then Christ died for nought</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 9:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>so Christ also, having
been once</hi> [or, <q><hi rend='italic'>once for all</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>offered to bear the sins of many, shall appear a second time, apart from sin, to them that
wait for him, unto salvation</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 3:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We reckon therefore that a man is justified by faith apart from the
works of the law</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eccl. 11:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if a tree fall toward the south or toward the north, in the place where the tree falleth
there shall it be</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And while they went away to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready
went in with him to the marriage feast: and the door was shut</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 16:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And besides all this, between us and
you there is a great gulf fixed, that they that would pass from hence to you may not be able, and that none may cross
over from thence to us</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 9:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>it is appointed unto men once to die, and after this cometh judgment</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev.
22:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that is unrighteous, let him do unrighteousness still: and he that is filthy, let him be made filthy still: and
he that is righteous, let him do righteousness still: and he that is holy, let him be made holy still.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Rome teaches that the agonies of purgatory are intolerable. They differ from the pains
of the damned only in this, that there is a limit to the one, not the other. Bellarmine, De
Purgatorio, 2:14&mdash;<q>The pains of purgatory are very severe, surpassing any endured in
this life.</q> Since none but actual saints escape the pains of purgatory, this doctrine
gives to the death and the funeral of the Roman Catholic a dreadful and repellent
aspect. Death is not the coming of Christ to take his disciples home, but is rather the
ushering of the shrinking soul into a place of unspeakable suffering. This suffering
makes satisfaction for guilt. Having paid their allotted penalty, the souls of the purified
pass into Heaven without awaiting the day of judgment. The doctrine of purgatory
gives hope that men may be saved after death; prayer for the dead has influence; the
priest is authorized to offer this prayer; so the church sells salvation for money.
Amory H. Bradford, Ascent of the Soul, 267-287, argues in favor of prayers for the dead.
Such prayers, he says, help us to keep in mind the fact that they are living still. If
the dead are free beings, they may still choose good or evil, and our prayers may help
them to choose the good. We should be thankful, he believes, to the Roman Catholic
Church, for keeping up such prayers. We reply that no doctrine of Rome has done so
much to pervert the gospel and to enslave the world.
</p>

<p>
For the Romanist doctrine, see Perrone, Prælectiones Theologicæ, 2:391-420. <hi rend='italic'>Per
contra</hi>, see Hodge, Systematic Theology, 3:743-770; Barrows, Purgatory. Augustine,
Encheiridion, 69, suggests the possibility of purgatorial fire in the future for some
believers. Whiton, Is Eternal Punishment Endless? page 69, says that Tertullian held
to a delay of resurrection in the case of faulty Christians; Cyprian first stated the notion
of a middle state of purification; Augustine thought it <q>not incredible</q>; Gregory the
Great called it <q>worthy of belief</q>; it is now one of the most potent doctrines of the
Roman Catholic Church; that church has been, from the third century, for all souls
who accept her last consolations, practically restorationist. Gore, Incarnation, 18&mdash;<q>In
the Church of Rome, the 'peradventure' of an Augustine as to purgatory for
the imperfect after death&mdash;'non redarguo', he says, 'quia forsitan verum est,'&mdash;has
become a positive teaching about purgatory, full of exact information.</q>
</p>

<p>
Elliott, Horæ Apocalypticæ, 1:410, adopts Hume's simile, and says that purgatory
gave the Roman Catholic Church what Archimedes wanted, another world on which
to fix its lever, that so fixed, the church might with it move this world. We must
remember, however, that the Roman church teaches no radical change of character in
purgatory,&mdash;purgatory is only a purifying process for believers. The true purgatory
is only in this world,&mdash;for only here are sins purged away by God's sanctifying Spirit;
and in this process of purification, though God chastises, there is no element of penalty.
On Dante's Purgatory, see A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 515-518.
</p>

<pb n='1002'/><anchor id='Pg1002'/>

<p>
Luckock, After Death, is an argument, based upon the Fathers, against the Romanist
doctrine. Yet he holds to progress in sanctification in the intermediate state, though
the work done in that state will not affect the final judgment, which will be for the
deeds done in the body. He urges prayer for the departed righteous. In his book
entitled The Intermediate State, Luckock holds to mental and spiritual development in
that state, to active ministry, mutual recognition, and renewed companionship. He
does not believe in a second probation, but in a first real probation for those who have
had no proper opportunities in this life. In their reaction against purgatory, the Westminister
divines obliterated the Intermediate State. In that state there is gradual
purification, and must be, since not all impurity and sinfulness are removed at
death. The purging of the will requires time. White robes were given to them while
they were waiting (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 6:11</hi>). But there is no second probation for those who have
thrown away their opportunities in this life. Robert Browning, The Ring and the
Book, 232 (Pope, 2129), makes the Pope speak of following Guido <q>Into that sad,
obscure, sequestered state Where God unmakes but to remake the soul He else made
first in vain; which must not be.</q> But the idea of hell as permitting essential change
of character is foreign to Roman Catholic doctrine.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We close our discussion of this subject with a single, but an important,
remark,&mdash;this, namely, that while the Scriptures represent the intermediate
state to be one of conscious joy to the righteous, and of conscious pain to
the wicked, they also represent this state to be one of incompleteness. The
perfect joy of the saints, and the utter misery of the wicked, begin only
with the resurrection and general judgment.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
That the intermediate state is one of incompleteness, appears from the following
passages: <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 8:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>What have we to do with thee, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before
the time?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:3, 4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked. For indeed we that are in this
tabernacle do groan, being burdened; not for that we would be unclothed, but that we would be clothed upon, that what is
mortal may be swallowed up of life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And not only so, but ourselves also, who have the first-fruits
of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for our adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if by any means I may attain unto the resurrection from the dead</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 2:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Lord knoweth
how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to keep the unrighteous under punishment unto the day of judgment</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 6:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and they</hi> [the souls underneath the altar] <hi rend='italic'>cried with a great voice, saying, How long, O
Master, the holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
In opposition to Locke, Human Understanding, 2:1:10, who said that <q>the soul
thinks not always</q>; and to Turner, Wish and Will, 48, who declares that <q>the soul
need not always think, any more than the body always move; the essence of the soul is
potentiality for activity</q>; Descartes, Kant, Jouffroy, Sir William Hamilton, all
maintain that it belongs to mental existence continuously to think. Upon this view,
the intermediate state would be necessarily a state of thought. As to the nature of
that thought, Dorner remarks in his Eschatology that <q>in this relatively bodiless
state, a still life begins, a sinking of the soul into itself and into the ground of its
being,&mdash;what Steffens calls <q>involution,</q> and Martensen <q>self-brooding.</q> In this
state, spiritual things are the only realities. In the unbelieving, their impurity, discord,
alienation from God, are laid bare. If they still prefer sin, its form becomes more
spiritual, more demoniacal, and so ripens for the judgment.</q>
</p>

<p>
Even here, Dorner deals in speculation rather than in Scripture. But he goes further,
and regards the intermediate state as one, not only of moral progress, but of elimination
of evil; and holds the end of probation to be, not at death, but at the judgment, at
least in the case of all non-believers who are not incorrigible. We must regard this as
a practical revival of the Romanist theory of purgatory, and as contradicted not only
by all the considerations already urged, but also by the general tenor of Scriptural
representation that the decisions of this life are final, and that character is fixed here
for eternity. This is the solemnity of preaching, that the gospel is <q><hi rend='italic'>a savor from life unto
life</hi>,</q> or <q><hi rend='italic'>a savor from death unto death</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 2:16</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Descartes: <q>As the light always shines and the heat always warms, so the soul
always thinks.</q> James, Psychology, 1:164-175, argues against unconscious mental
states. The states were conscious at the time we had them; but they have been forgotten.
In the Unitarian Review, Sept. 1884, Prof. James denies that eternity is given
at a stroke to omniscience. Lotze, in his Metaphysics, 268, in opposition to Kant, contends
for the transcendental validity of time. Green, on the contrary, in Prolegomena
<pb n='1003'/><anchor id='Pg1003'/>
to Ethics, book 1, says that every act of knowledge in the case of man is a timeless act.
In comparing the different aspects of the stream of successive phenomena, the mind
must, he says, be itself out of time. Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 306, denies this timeless
consciousness even to God, and apparently agrees with Martineau in maintaining that
God does not foreknow free human acts.
</p>

<p>
De Quincey called the human brain a palimpsest. Each new writing seems to blot
out all that went before. Yet in reality not one letter has ever been effaced. Loeb,
Physiology of the Brain, 213, tells us that associative memory is imitated by machines
like the phonograph. Traces left by speech can be reproduced in speech. Loeb calls
memory a matter of physical chemistry. Stout, Manual of Psychology, 8&mdash;<q>Consciousness
includes not only awareness of our own states, but these states themselves
whether we are aware of them or not. If a man is angry, that is a state of consciousness,
even though he does not know that he is angry. If he does know that he is angry,
that is another modification of consciousness, and not the same.</q> On unconscious
mental action, see Ladd, Philosophy of Mind, 378-382&mdash;<q>Cerebration cannot be identified
with psychical processes. If it could be, materialism would triumph. If the brain
can do these things, why not do all the phenomena of consciousness? Consciousness
becomes a mere <foreign rend='italic'>epi</foreign>phenomenon. Unconscious cerebration = wooden iron or unconscious
consciousness. What then becomes of the soul in its intervals of unconsciousness?
Answer: Unconscious finite minds exist only in the World-ground in which all
minds and things have their existence.</q>
</p>

<p>
On the whole subject, see Hovey, State of Man after Death; Savage, Souls of the
Righteous; Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, 2:304-446; Neander, Planting and Training, 482-484;
Delitzsch, Bib. Psychologie, 407-448; Bib. Sac., 13:153; Methodist Rev., 34:240; Christian
Rev., 20:381; Herzog, Encyclop., art.: Hades; Stuart, Essays on Future Punishment;
Whately, Future State; Hovey, Biblical Eschatology, 79-144.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. The Second Coming of Christ.</head>

<p>
While the Scriptures represent great events in the history of the individual
Christian, like death, and great events in the history of the church, like
the outpouring of the Spirit at Pentecost and the destruction of Jerusalem,
as comings of Christ for deliverance or judgment, they also declare that
these partial and typical comings shall be concluded by a final, triumphant
return of Christ, to punish the wicked and to complete the salvation of his
people.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Temporal comings of Christ are indicated in: <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 24:23, 27, 34</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Then if any man shall say unto
you, Lo, here is the Christ, or, Here; believe it not.... For as the lightning cometh forth from the east, and is seen
even unto the west; so shall be the coming of the Son of man.... Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not
pass away, till all these things be accomplished</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>16:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Verily I say unto you, There are some of them that stand
here, who shall in no wise taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 14:3, 18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And
if I go and prepare a place for you, I come again, and will receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may
be also.... I will not leave you desolate: I come unto you</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 3:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, I stand at the door and knock:
if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.</hi></q>
So the Protestant Reformation, the modern missionary enterprise, the battle against
papacy in Europe and against slavery in this country, the great revivals under Whitefield
in England and under Edwards in America, were all preliminary and typical
comings of Christ. It was a sceptical spirit which indited the words: <q>God's new
Messiah, some great Cause</q>; yet it is true that in every great movement of civilization
we are to recognize a new coming of the one and only Messiah, <q><hi rend='italic'>Jesus Christ, the same
yesterday and to-day and forever</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 13:8</hi>). Schaff, Hist. Christ. Church, 1:840&mdash;<q>The coming
began with his ascension to heaven (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 26:64</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>henceforth</hi> ἀπ᾽ ἄρτι [<hi rend='italic'>from now</hi>]
<hi rend='italic'>ye shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming on the clouds of heaven</hi></q>).</q> Matheson,
Spir. Devel. of St. Paul, 286&mdash;<q>To Paul, in his later letters, this world is already the
scene of the second advent. The secular is not to vanish away, but to be permanent,
transfigured, pervaded by the divine life. Paul began with the Christ of the resurrection;
he ends with the Christ who already makes all things new.</q> See Metcalf,
Parousia <hi rend='italic'>vs.</hi> Second Advent, in Bib. Sac., Jan. 1907:61-65.
</p>

<p>
The final coming of Christ is referred to in: <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 24:30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they shall see the Son of man coming
on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And he shall send forth his angels with a great sound of a
<pb n='1004'/><anchor id='Pg1004'/>
trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>25:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But
when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his
glory</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 1:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye looking into heaven? this Jesus, who was received up from
you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye beheld him going into heaven</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 4:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the Lord
himself shall descend from heaven, with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess.
1:7, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with the angels of his power ... when he shall come to be
glorified in his saints, and to be marvelled at in all them that believed</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 9:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>so Christ also, having been
once offered to bear the sins of many, shall appear a second time, apart from sin, to them that wait for him, unto salvation</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 1:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, he cometh with the clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they that pierced him; and
all the tribes of the earth shall mourn over him.</hi></q> Dr. A. C. Kendrick, Com. on <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 1:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And when
he shall conduct back again into the inhabited world the First-born, he saith, And let
all the angels of God worship him</hi></q>&mdash;in the glory of the second coming Christ's
superiority to angels will be signally displayed&mdash;a contrast to the humiliation of his
first coming.
</p>

<p>
The tendency of our day is to interpret this second class of passages in a purely metaphorical
and spiritual way. But prophecy can have more than one fulfilment. Jesus'
words are pregnant words. The present spiritual coming does not exhaust their
meaning. His coming in the great movements of history does not preclude a final and
literal coming, in which <q><hi rend='italic'>every eye shall see him</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 1:7</hi>). With this proviso, we may
assent to much of the following quotation from Gould, Bib. Theol. N. T., 44-58&mdash;<q>The
last things of which Jesus speaks are not the end of the world, but of the age&mdash;the
end of the Jewish period in connection with the destruction of Jerusalem.... After
the entire statement is in, including both the destruction of Jerusalem and the coming
of the Lord which is to follow it, it is distinctly said that that generation was not to
pass away until all these things are accomplished. According to this, the coming of the
Son of man must be something other than a visible coming. In O. T. prophecy any
divine interference in human affairs is represented under the figure of God coming in
the clouds of heaven. <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 26:64</hi> says: <q><hi rend='italic'>From this time ye shall see the Son of man seated ... and
coming in the clouds of heaven</hi>.</q> Coming and judgment are both continuous. The slow growth
in the parables of the leaven and the mustard seed contradicts the idea of Christ's early
coming. <q><hi rend='italic'>After a long time the Lord of these servants cometh</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:19</hi>). Christ came in one sense
at the destruction of Jerusalem; in another sense all great crises in the history of the
world are comings of the Son of man. These judgments of the nations are a part of
the process for the final setting up of the kingdom. But this final act will not be a
judgment process, but the final entire submission of the will of man to the will of God.
The end is to be, not judgment, but salvation.</q> We add to this statement the declaration
that the final act here spoken of will not be purely subjective and spiritual, but
will constitute an external manifestation of Christ comparable to that of his first coming
in its appeal to the senses, but unspeakably more glorious than was the coming to
the manger and the cross. The proof of this we now proceed to give.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. The nature of this coming.</head>

<p>
Although without doubt accompanied, in the case of the regenerate, by
inward and invisible influences of the Holy Spirit, the second advent is to
be outward and visible. This we argue:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From the objects to be secured by Christ's return. These are partly
external (Rom. 8:21, 23). Nature and the body are both to be glorified.
These external changes may well be accompanied by a visible manifestation
of him who <q>makes all things new</q> (Rev. 21:5).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:10-23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in hope that the creation also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of
the glory of the children of God ... waiting for our adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold,
I make all things new.</hi></q> A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 49&mdash;<q>We must not confound
the <emph>Paraclete</emph> and the <emph>Parousia</emph>. It has been argued that, because Christ came
in the person of the Spirit, the Redeemer's advent in glory has already taken place.
But in the Paraclete Christ comes spiritually and invisibly; in the Parousia he comes
bodily and gloriously.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From the Scriptural comparison of the manner of Christ's return
with the manner of his departure (Acts 1:11)&mdash;see Commentary of
<pb n='1005'/><anchor id='Pg1005'/>
Hackett, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>:&mdash;<q>ὂν τρόπον = visibly, and in the air. The expression is
never employed to affirm merely the certainty of one event as compared
with another. The assertion that the meaning is simply that, as Christ had
departed, so also he would return, is contradicted by every passage in
which the phrase occurs.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 1:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>this Jesus, who was received up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye beheld him
going into heaven</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Acts 7:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>wouldest thou kill me, as ὂν τρόπον thou killedst the Egyptian yesterday?</hi></q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 23:37</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as ὂν τρόπον a hen gathereth
her chickens under her wings</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 3:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as ὂν τρόπον Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also
withstand the truth.</hi></q> Lyman Abbott refers to <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 23:37</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Luke 13:35</hi>, as showing that, in
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 1:11</hi>, <q><hi rend='italic'>in like manner</hi></q> means only <q><hi rend='italic'>in like reality</hi>.</q> So, he says, the Jews expected
Elijah to return in <emph>form</emph>, according to <hi rend='italic'>Mal. 4:5</hi>, whereas he returned only in <emph>spirit</emph>. Jesus
similarly returned at Pentecost in spirit, and has been coming again ever since. The
remark of Dr. Hackett, quoted in the text above, is sufficient proof that this interpretation
is wholly unexegetical.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) From the analogy of Christ's first coming. If this was a literal and
visible coming, we may expect the second coming to be literal and visible
also.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 4:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the Lord himself</hi> [= in his own person] <hi rend='italic'>shall descend from heaven, with a shout</hi>
[something heard], <hi rend='italic'>with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God</hi></q>&mdash;see Com. of Prof. W.
A. Stevens: <q>So different from <hi rend='italic'>Luke 17:20</hi>, where <q><hi rend='italic'>the kingdom of God cometh not with observation</hi>.</q>
The <q><hi rend='italic'>shout</hi></q> is not necessarily the voice of Christ himself (lit. <q><hi rend='italic'>in a shout</hi>,</q> or <q><hi rend='italic'>in shouting</hi></q>).
<q><hi rend='italic'>Voice of the archangel</hi></q> and <q><hi rend='italic'>trump of God</hi></q> are appositional, not additional.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 1:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>every eye
shall see him</hi></q>; as every ear shall hear him: <hi rend='italic'>John 5:28, 29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>all that are in the tombs shall hear his
voice</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 2:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to the end that ye be not quickly shaken from your mind, nor yet be troubled ... as that
the day of the Lord is now present</hi></q>&mdash;they may have <q>thought that the first gathering of the
saints to Christ was a quiet, invisible one&mdash;a stealthy advent, like a thief in the night</q>
(Lillie). <hi rend='italic'>2 John 7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For many deceivers are gone forth into the world, even they that confess not that Jesus Christ
cometh in the flesh</hi></q>&mdash;here denial of a future second coming of Christ is declared to be the
mark of a deceiver.
</p>

<p>
Alford and Alexander, in their Commentaries on <hi rend='italic'>Acts 1:11</hi>, agree with the view of
Hackett quoted above. Warren, Parousia, 61-65, 106-114, controverts this view and says
that <q>an omnipresent divine being can <emph>come</emph>, only in the sense of <emph>manifestation</emph>.</q> He
regards the parousia, or coming of Christ, as nothing but Christ's spiritual presence. A
writer in the Presb. Review, 1883:221, replies that Warren's view is contradicted <q>by
the fact that the apostles often spoke of the parousia as an event yet future, long after
the promise of the Redeemer's spiritual presence with his church had begun to be
fulfilled, and by the fact that Paul expressly cautions the Thessalonians against the
belief that the parousia was just at hand.</q> We do not know how all men at one time
can see a bodily Christ; but we also do not know the nature of Christ's body. The day
exists undivided in many places at the same time. The telephone has made it possible
for men widely separated to hear the same voice,&mdash;it is equally possible that all men
may see the same Christ coming in the clouds.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. The time of Christ's coming.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Although Christ's prophecy of this event, in the twenty-fourth chapter
of Matthew, so connects it with the destruction of Jerusalem that the
apostles and the early Christians seem to have hoped for its occurrence
during their life-time, yet neither Christ nor the apostles definitely taught
when the end should be, but rather declared the knowledge of it to be
reserved in the counsels of God, that men might ever recognize it as
possibly at hand, and so might live in the attitude of constant expectation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:51</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 4:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>then we that are alive, that
are left, shall together with them be caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with the
Lord</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 4:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous
judge, shall give to me at that day: and not only to me, but also to all them that have loved his appearing</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>James
<pb n='1006'/><anchor id='Pg1006'/>
5:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Be patient therefore, brethren, until the coming of the Lord</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Pet. 4:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But the end of all things is at hand:
be ye therefore of sound mind, and be sober unto prayer</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 John 2:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Little children, it is the last hour: and as ye
heard that antichrist cometh, even now have there risen many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last hour.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 4:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The Lord is at hand (ἐγγύς). In nothing be anxious</hi></q>&mdash;may mean <q>the Lord is near</q>
(in space), without any reference to the second coming. The passages quoted above,
expressing as they do the surmises of the apostles that Christ's coming was near, while
yet abstaining from all definite fixing of the time, are at least sufficient proof that
Christ's advent may not be near to our time. We should be no more warranted than
they were, in inferring from these passages alone the immediate coming of the Lord.
</p>

<p>
Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 2:349-350, maintains that Jesus expected his own speedy
second coming and the end of the world. There was no mention of the death of his disciples,
or the importance of readiness for it. No hard and fast organization of his disciples
into a church was contemplated by him,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 16:18</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>18:17</hi> are not authentic. No
separation of his disciples from the fellowship of the Jewish religion was thought of.
He thought of the destruction of Jerusalem as the final judgment. Yet his doctrine
would spread through the earth, like leaven and mustard seed, though accompanied by
suffering on the part of his disciples. This view of Wendt can be maintained only by
an arbitrary throwing out of the testimony of the evangelist, upon the ground that
Jesus' mention of a church does not befit so early a stage in the evolution of Christianity.
Wendt's whole treatment is vitiated by the presupposition that there can be
nothing in Jesus' words which is inexplicable upon the theory of natural development.
That Jesus did not expect speedily to return to earth is shown in <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>After a long
time the Lord of those servants cometh</hi></q>; and Paul, in <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess.</hi>, had to correct the mistake of those
who interpreted him as having in his first Epistle declared an immediate coming of the
Lord.
</p>

<p>
A. H. Strong, Cleveland Sermon, 1904:27&mdash;<q>The faith in a second coming of Christ has
lost its hold upon many Christians in our day. But it still serves to stimulate and
admonish the great body, and we can never dispense with its solemn and mighty influence.
Christ comes, it is true, in Pentecostal revivals and in destructions of Jerusalem,
in Reformation movements and in political upheavals. But these are only precursors of
another and literal and final return of Christ, to punish the wicked and to complete the
salvation of his people. That day for which all other days are made will be a joyful day
for those who have fought a good fight and have kept the faith. Let us look for and
hasten the coming of the day of God. The Jacobites of Scotland never ceased their
labors and sacrifices for their king's return. They never tasted wine, without pledging
their absent prince; they never joined in song, without renewing their oaths of allegiance.
In many a prison cell and on many a battlefield they rang out the strain:
<q>Follow thee, follow thee, wha wadna follow thee? Long hast thou lo'ed and trusted
us fairly: Chairlie, Chairlie, wha wadna follow thee? King o' the Highland hearts,
bonnie Prince Chairlie!</q> So they sang, so they invited him, until at last he came.
But that longing for the day when Charles should come to his own again was faint and
weak compared with the longing of true Christian hearts for the coming of their King.
Charles came, only to suffer defeat, and to bring shame to his country. But Christ will
come, to put an end to the world's long sorrow, to give triumph to the cause of truth,
to bestow everlasting reward upon the faithful. <q>Even so, Lord Jesus, come! Hope of
all our hopes the sum, Take thy waiting people home! Long, so long, the groaning
earth, Cursed with war and flood and dearth, Sighs for its redemption birth. Therefore
come, we daily pray; Bring the resurrection-day; Wipe creation's curse away!</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Hence we find, in immediate connection with many of these predictions
of the end, a reference to intervening events and to the eternity of
God, which shows that the prophecies themselves are expressed in a large
way which befits the greatness of the divine plans.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 24:36</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But of that day and hour knoweth no one, not even the angels of heaven, neither the Son, but the Father
only</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mark 13:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But of that day or that hour knoweth no one, not even the angels in heaven, neither the Son, but
the Father. Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 1:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And he said unto them, It
is not for you to know times or seasons, which the Father hath set within his own authority</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 10:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now
these things happened unto them by way of example; and they were written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of
the ages are come</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>16:22</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Marana tha</hi> [marg.: <hi rend='italic'>that is, O Lord, come!</hi>]</q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 2:1-3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now we beseech you,
brethren, touching the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto him; to the end that ye be not
quickly shaken from your mind, nor yet be troubled ... as that the day of the Lord is now present</hi> [Am. Rev.:
<pb n='1007'/><anchor id='Pg1007'/>
<q><hi rend='italic'>is just at hand</hi></q>]; <hi rend='italic'>let no man beguile you in any wise: for it will not be, except the falling away come first, and the
man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>James 5:8, 9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Be ye also patient; establish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord is at hand. Murmur not,
brethren, one against another, that ye be not judged: behold, the judge standeth before the doors</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 3:3-12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in
the last days mockers shall come ... saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for, from the day that the fathers
fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. For this they wilfully forget, that there
were heavens from of old.... But forget not this one thing, beloved, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years,
and a thousand years as one day. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise.... But the day of the Lord will come
as a thief ... what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy living and godliness, looking for and earnestly
desiring</hi> [marg.: <q><hi rend='italic'>hastening</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>the coming of the day of God</hi></q>&mdash;awaiting it, and hastening its coming
by your prayer and labor.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 1:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of the prophecy, and keep the things that are
written therein: for the time is at hand</hi></q>: <hi rend='italic'>22:12, 20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to render
to each man according as his work is.... He who testifieth these things saith, Yea: I come quickly. Amen: come,
Lord Jesus.</hi></q> From these passages it is evident that the apostles did not know the time
of the end, and that it was hidden from Christ himself while here in the flesh. He, therefore,
who assumes to know, assumes to know more than Christ or his apostles&mdash;assumes
to know the very thing which Christ declared it was not for us to know!
</p>

<p>
Gould, Bib. Theol. N.T., 152&mdash;<q>The expectation of our Lord's coming was one of the
elements and <emph>motifs</emph> of that generation, and the delay of the event caused some questioning.
But there is never any indication that it may be indefinitely postponed. The
early church never had to face the difficulty forced upon the church to-day, of belief in
his second coming, founded upon a prophecy of his coming during the lifetime of a
generation long since dead. And until this Epistle [<hi rend='italic'>2 Peter</hi>], we do not find any traces of
this exegetical legerdemain as such a situation would require. But here we have it full-grown;
just such a specimen of harmonistic device as orthodox interpretation familiarizes
us with. The definite statement that the advent is to be within that generation
is met with the general principle that <q><hi rend='italic'>one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years
as one day</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 3:8</hi>).</q> We must regard this comment of Dr. Gould as an unconscious
fulfilment of the prediction that <q><hi rend='italic'>in the last days mockers shall come with mockery</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 3:3</hi>). A
better understanding of prophecy, as divinely pregnant utterance, would have enabled
the critic to believe that the words of Christ might be partially fulfilled in the days of
the apostles, but fully accomplished only at the end of the world.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) In this we discern a striking parallel between the predictions of
Christ's first, and the predictions of his second, advent. In both cases the
event was more distant and more grand than those imagined to whom the
prophecies first came. Under both dispensations, patient waiting for Christ
was intended to discipline the faith, and to enlarge the conceptions, of God's
true servants. The fact that every age since Christ ascended has had its
Chiliasts and Second Adventists should turn our thoughts away from
curious and fruitless prying into the time of Christ's coming, and set us at
immediate and constant endeavor to be ready, at whatsoever hour he may
appear.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gen. 4:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the man knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man with
the help of Jehovah</hi> [lit.: <q><hi rend='italic'>I have gotten a man, even Jehovah</hi></q>]</q>&mdash;an intimation that Eve fancied her
first-born to be already the promised seed, the coming deliverer; see MacWhorter,
Jahveh Christ. <hi rend='italic'>Deut. 18:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Jehovah thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy
brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken</hi></q>&mdash;here is a prophecy which Moses may have
expected to be fulfilled in Joshua, but which God designed to be fulfilled only in Christ.
<hi rend='italic'>Is. 7:14, 16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Therefore the Lord himself will give you a sign: behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and
shall call his name Immanuel.... For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land
whose two kings thou abhorrest shall be forsaken</hi></q>&mdash;a prophecy which the prophet may have
expected to be fulfilled in his own time, and which was partly so fulfilled, but which God
intended to be fulfilled ages thereafter.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 2:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Simeon; and this man was righteous and devout, looking for the consolation of Israel</hi></q>&mdash;Simeon
was the type of holy men, in every age of Jewish history, who were waiting for the fulfilment
of God's promise, and for the coming of the deliverer. So under the Christian
dispensation. Augustine held that Christ's reign of a thousand years, which occupies
the last epoch of the world's history, did not still lie in the future, but began with the
<pb n='1008'/><anchor id='Pg1008'/>
founding of the church (Ritschl, Just. and Reconc., 286). Luther, near the time of his
death, said: <q>God forbid that the world should last fifty years longer! Let him cut
matters short with his last judgment!</q> Melanchthon put the end less than two hundred
years from his time. Calvin's motto was: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Domine, quousque?</foreign></q>&mdash;<q>O Lord, how
long?</q> Jonathan Edwards, before and during the great Awakening, indulged high
expectations as to the probable extension of the movement until it should bring the
world, even in his own lifetime, into the love and obedience of Christ (Life, by Allen,
234). Better than any one of these is the utterance of Dr. Broadus: <q>If I am always
ready, I shall be ready when Jesus comes.</q> On the whole subject, see Hovey, in
Baptist Quarterly, Oct. 1877:416-432; Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:641-646; Stevens, in Am.
Com. on Thessalonians, Excursus on The Parousia, and notes on <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 4:13, 16; 5:11; 2
Thess. 2:3, 12</hi>; Goodspeed, Messiah's Second Advent; Heagle, That Blessed Hope.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. The precursors of Christ's coming.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Through the preaching of the gospel in all the world, the kingdom
of Christ is steadily to enlarge its boundaries, until Jews and Gentiles alike
become possessed of its blessings, and a millennial period is introduced in
which Christianity generally prevails throughout the earth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Dan. 2:44, 45</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And in the days of those kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be
destroyed, nor shall the sovereignty thereof be left to another people; but it shall break in pieces and consume all these
kingdoms, and it shall stand forever. Forasmuch as thou sawest that a stone was cut out of the mountain without
hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known
to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 13:31, 32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed ... which indeed is less than all
seeds; but when it is grown, it is greater than the herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of heaven come and
lodge in the branches thereof</hi></q>&mdash;the parable of the leaven, which follows, apparently illustrates
the intensive, as that of the mustard seed illustrates the extensive, development of the
kingdom of God; and it is as impossible to confine the reference of the leaven to the
spread of evil as it is impossible to confine the reference of the mustard seed to the
spread of good.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 24:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the whole world for a testimony unto all the
nations; and then shall the end come</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 11:25, 26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>a hardening in part hath befallen Israel, until the fulness
of the Gentiles be come in; and so all Israel shall be saved</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:4-6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I saw thrones, and they sat upon
them, and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that had been beheaded for the testimony of
Jesus, and for the word of God, and such as worshipped not the beast, neither his image, and received not the mark upon
their forehead and upon their hand; and they lived, and reigned with Christ a thousand years.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Col. 1:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the gospel which ye heard, which was preached in all creation under heaven</hi></q>&mdash;Paul's phrase
here and the apparent reference in <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 24:14</hi> to A. D. 70 as the time of the end, should
restrain theorizers from insisting that the second coming of Christ cannot occur until
this text has been fulfilled with literal completeness (Broadus).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) There will be a corresponding development of evil, either extensive
or intensive, whose true character shall be manifest not only in deceiving
many professed followers of Christ and in persecuting true believers, but in
constituting a personal Antichrist as its representative and object of worship.
This rapid growth shall continue until the millennium, during which evil,
in the person of its chief, shall be temporarily restrained.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 13:30, 38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers,
Gather up first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my barn ... the field
is the world; and the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom; and the tares are the sons of the evil one</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>24:5,
11, 12, 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For many shall come in my name, saying, I am the Christ; and shall lead many astray.... And many
false prophets shall arise, and shall lead many astray. And because iniquity shall be multiplied, the love of the many
shall wax cold.... For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders; so
as to lead astray, if possible, even the elect.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 21:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But before all these things, they shall lay their hands on you, and shall persecute you, delivering you
up to the synagogues and prisons, bringing you before kings and governors for my name's sake</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 2:3, 4, 7, 8,</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>it
will not be, except the falling away come first, and the man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, he that
opposeth and exalteth himself against all that is called God or that is worshipped; so that he sitteth in the temple of God,
setting himself forth as God.... For the mystery of lawlessness doth already work: only there is one that restraineth
<pb n='1009'/><anchor id='Pg1009'/>
now, until he be taken out of the way. And then shall be revealed the lawless one, whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with
the breath of his mouth, and bring to nought by the manifestation of his coming.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Elliott, Horæ Apocalypticæ, 1:65, holds that <q>Antichrist means another Christ, a
pro-Christ, a vice-Christ, a pretender to the name of Christ, and in that character, an
usurper and adversary. The principle of Antichrist was already sown in the time of
Paul. But a certain hindrance, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, the Roman Empire as then constituted, needed
first to be removed out of the way, before room could be made for Antichrist's development.</q>
Antichrist, according to this view, is the hierarchical spirit, which found its
final and most complete expression in the Papacy. Dante, Hell, 19:106-117, speaks of
the Papacy, or rather the temporal power of the Popes, as Antichrist: <q>To you St.
John referred, O shepherds vile, When she who sits on many waters, had Been seen
with kings her person to defile</q>; see A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 507.
</p>

<p>
It has been objected that a simultaneous growth both of evil and of good is inconceivable,
and that the progress of the divine kingdom implies a diminution in the
power of the adversary. Only a slight reflection however convinces us that, as the
population of the world is always increasing, evil men may increase in numbers, even
though there is increase in the numbers of the good. But we must also consider that
evil grows in intensity just in proportion to the light which good throws upon it.
<q>Wherever God erects a house of prayer, The devil always builds a chapel there.</q>
Every revival of religion stirs up the forces of wickedness to opposition. As Christ's
first advent occasioned an unusual outburst of demoniac malignity, so Christ's second
advent will be resisted by a final desperate effort of the evil one to overcome the forces
of good. The great awakening in New England under Jonathan Edwards caused on
the one hand a most remarkable increase in the number of Baptist believers, but also
on the other hand the rise of modern Unitarianism. The optimistic Presbyterian pastor
at Auburn argued with the pessimistic chaplain of the State's Prison that the world
was certainly growing better, because his congregation was increasing; whereupon
the chaplain replied that his own congregation was increasing also.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) At the close of this millennial period, evil will again be permitted
to exert its utmost power in a final conflict with righteousness. This spiritual
struggle, moreover, will be accompanied and symbolized by political
convulsions, and by fearful indications of desolation in the natural world.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 24:29, 30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But immediately after the tribulation of those days the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall
not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken: and then shall
appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 21:8-28</hi>&mdash;false prophets; wars and tumults;
earthquakes; pestilences; persecutions; signs in the sun, moon, and stars; <q><hi rend='italic'>And then
shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory. But when these things begin to come to
pass, look up, and lift up your heads; because your redemption draweth nigh.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Interpretations of the book of Revelation are divided into three classes: (1) the
<hi rend='italic'>Præterist</hi> (held by Grotius, Moses Stuart, and Warren), which regards the prophecy as
mainly fulfilled in the age immediately succeeding the time of the apostles (666 = Neron
Kaisar); (2) the <hi rend='italic'>Continuous</hi> (held by Isaac Newton, Vitringa, Bengel, Elliott, Kelly,
and Cumming), which regards the whole as a continuous prophetical history, extending
from the first age until the end of all things (666 = Lateinos); Hengstenberg and
Alford hold substantially this view, though they regard the seven seals, trumpets, and
vials as synchronological, each succeeding set going over the same ground and exhibiting
it in some special aspect; (3) the <hi rend='italic'>Futurist</hi> (held by Maitland and Todd), which
considers the book as describing events yet to occur, during the times immediately
preceding and following the coming of the Lord.
</p>

<p>
Of all these interpretations, the most learned and exhaustive is that of Elliott, in his
four volumes entitled Horæ Apocalypticæ. The basis of his interpretation is the <q><hi rend='italic'>time
and times and half a time</hi></q> of <hi rend='italic'>Dan. 7:25</hi>, which according to the year-day theory means 1260
years&mdash;the year, according to ancient reckoning, containing 360 days, and the <q><hi rend='italic'>time</hi></q>
being therefore 360 years [360 + (2 X 360) + 180 = 1260]. This phrase we find recurring
with regard to the woman nourished in the wilderness (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 12:14</hi>). The blasphemy of
the beast for forty and two months (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 13:5</hi>) seems to refer to the same period [42 X 30
= 1260, as before]. The two witnesses prophecy 1260 days (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 11:3</hi>); and the woman's
time in the wilderness is stated (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 12:6</hi>) as 1260 days. This period of 1260 years is
regarded by Elliott as the time of the temporal power of the Papacy.
</p>

<p>
There is a twofold <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus a quo</foreign>, and correspondingly a twofold <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus ad quem</foreign>.
The first commencement is A. D. 531, when in the edict of Justinian the dragon of the
<pb n='1010'/><anchor id='Pg1010'/>
Roman Empire gives its power to the beast of the Papacy, and resigns its throne to the
rising Antichrist, giving opportunity for the rise of the ten horns as European kings
(<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 13:1-3</hi>). The second commencement, adding the seventy-five supplementary years
of <hi rend='italic'>Daniel 12:12</hi> [1335 - 1260 = 75], is A. D. 606, when the Emperor Phocas acknowledges the
primacy of Rome, and the ten horns, or kings, now diademed, submit to the Papacy
(<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 17:12, 13</hi>). The first ending-point is A. D. 1791, when the French Revolution struck
the first blow at the independence of the Pope [531 + 1260 = 1791]. The second ending-point
is A. D. 1866, when the temporal power of the Pope was abolished at the unification
of the kingdom of Italy [606 + 1260 = 1866]. Elliott regards the two-horned beast
(<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 13:11</hi>) as representing the Papal Clergy, and the image of the beast (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 13:14, 15</hi>) as
representing the Papal Councils.
</p>

<p>
Unlike Hengstenberg and Alford, who consider the seals, trumpets, and vials as synchronological,
Elliott makes the seven trumpets to be an unfolding of the seventh seal,
and the seven vials to be an unfolding of the seventh trumpet. Like other advocates
of the premillennial advent of Christ, Elliott regards the four chief signs of Christ's
near approach as being: (1) the decay of the Turkish Empire (the drying up of the
river Euphrates&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 16:12</hi>); (2) the Pope's loss of temporal power (the destruction
of Babylon&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 17:19</hi>); (3) the conversion of the Jews and their return to their own
land (<hi rend='italic'>Ez. 37; Rom. 11:12-15, 25-27</hi>&mdash;but on this last, see Meyer); (4) the pouring out of the
Holy Spirit and the conversion of the Gentiles (the way of the kings of the East&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Rev.
16:12</hi>; the fulness of the Gentiles&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 11:25</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Elliott's whole scheme, however, is vitiated by the fact that he wrongly assumes the
book of Revelation to have been written under Domitian (94 or 96), instead of under
Nero (67 or 68). His <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus a quo</foreign> is therefore incorrect, and his interpretation of
chapters 5-9 is rendered very precarious. The year 1866, moreover, should have been the
time of the end, and so the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus ad quem</foreign> seems to be clearly misunderstood&mdash;unless
indeed the seventy-five supplementary years of Daniel are to be added to 1866.
We regard the failure of this most ingenious scheme of Apocalyptic interpretation as
a practical demonstration that a clear understanding of the meaning of prophecy is,
before the event, impossible, and we are confirmed in this view by the utterly untenable
nature of the theory of the millennium which is commonly held by so-called Second
Adventists, a theory which we now proceed to examine.
</p>

<p>
A long preparation may be followed by a sudden consummation. Drilling the rock
for the blast is a slow process; firing the charge takes but a moment. The woodwork
of the Windsor Hotel in New York was in a charred and superheated state before the
electric wires that threaded it wore out their insulation,&mdash;then a slight increase of
voltage turned heat into flame. The Outlook, March 30, 1895&mdash;<q>An evolutionary conception
of the Second Coming, as a progressive manifestation of the spiritual power
and glory of Christ, may issue in a <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>dénouement</foreign> as unique as the first advent was which
closed the preparatory ages.</q>
</p>

<p>
Joseph Cook, on A. J. Gordon: <q>There is a wide distinction between the flash-light
theory and the burning-glass theory of missions. The latter was Dr. Gordon's view.
When a burning-glass is held over inflammable material, the concentrated rays of the
sun rapidly produce in it discoloration, smoke, and sparks. At a certain instant, after
the sparks have been sufficiently diffused, the whole material suddenly bursts into
flame. There is then no longer any need of the burning-glass, for fire has itself fallen
from on high and is able to do its own work. So the world is to be regarded as inflammable
material to be set on fire from on high. Our Lord's life on earth is a burning-glass,
concentrating rays of light and heat upon the souls of men. When the heating
has gone on far enough, and the sparks of incipient conflagration have been sufficiently
diffused, suddenly spiritual flame will burst up everywhere and will fill the earth. This
is the second advent of him who kindled humanity to new life by his first advent. As I
understand the premillenarian view of history, the date when the sparks shall kindle
into flame is not known, but it is known that the duty of the church is to spread the
sparks and to expect at any instant, after their wide diffusion, the victorious descent
of millennial flame, that is, the beginning of our Lord's personal and visible reign over
the whole earth.</q> See article on Millenarianism, by G. P. Fisher, in McClintock and
Strong's Cyclopædia; also by Semisch, in Schaff-Herzog, Cyclopædia; cf. Schaff,
History of the Christian Church, 1:840.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. Relation of Christ's second coming to the millennium.</head>

<p>
The Scripture foretells a period, called in the language of prophecy <q>a
thousand years,</q> when Satan shall be restrained and the saints shall reign
<pb n='1011'/><anchor id='Pg1011'/>
with Christ on the earth. A comparison of the passages bearing on this
subject leads us to the conclusion that this millennial blessedness and
dominion is prior to the second advent. One passage only seems at first
sight to teach the contrary, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: Rev. 20:4-10. But this supports the
theory of a premillennial advent only when the passage is interpreted with
the barest literalness. A better view of its meaning will be gained by
considering:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That it constitutes a part, and confessedly an obscure part, of one
of the most figurative books of Scripture, and therefore ought to be interpreted
by the plainer statements of the other Scriptures.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We quote here the passage alluded to: <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:4-10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them,
and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that had been beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, and
for the word of God, and such as worshipped not the beast, neither his image, and received not the mark upon their
forehead and upon their hand; and they lived, and reigned with Christ a thousand years. The rest of the dead lived not
until the thousand years should be finished. This is the first resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the
first resurrection: over these the second death hath no power; but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall
reign with him a thousand years.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Emerson and Parker met a Second Adventist who warned them that the end of the
world was near. Parker replied: <q>My friend, that does not concern me; I live in
Boston.</q> Emerson said: <q>Well, I think I can get along without it.</q> A similarly
cheerful view is taken by Denney, Studies in Theology, 232&mdash;<q>Christ certainly comes,
according to the picture in Revelation, before the millennium; but the question of
importance is, whether the conception of the millennium itself, related as it is to
Ezekiel, is essential to faith. I cannot think that it is. The religious content of the
passages&mdash;what they offer for faith to grasp&mdash;is, I should say, simply this: that <emph>until</emph>
the end the conflict between the kingdom of God and the kingdom of the world must
go on; that as the end approaches it becomes ever more intense, progress in humanity
not being a progress in goodness merely or in badness only, but in the antagonism
between the two; and that the necessity for conflict is sure to emerge even after the
kingdom of God has won its greatest triumphs. I frankly confess that to seek more
than this in such Scriptural indications seems to me trifling.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the other Scriptures contain nothing with regard to a resurrection
of the righteous which is widely separated in time from that of the
wicked, but rather declare distinctly that the second coming of Christ is
immediately connected both with the resurrection of the just and the
unjust and with the general judgment.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 16:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then shall he render
unto every man according to his deeds</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>25:31-33</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the
angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all the nations: and he
shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 5:28, 29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Marvel
not at this: for the hour cometh, in which all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall some forth; they that
have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor.
5:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For we must all be made manifest before the judgment seat of Christ; that each one may receive the things
done in the body, according to what he hath done, whether it be good or bad</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 1:6-10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if so be that it is
a righteous thing with God to recompense affliction to them that afflict you, and to you that are afflicted rest with us, at
the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with the angels of his power in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to them
that know not God, and to them that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus: who shall suffer punishment, even eternal
destruction from the face of the Lord and from the glory of his might, when he shall come to be glorified in his saints,
and to be marvelled at in all them that believed.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 3:7, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the day of judgment and destruction of ungodly men.... But the day of the Lord will come as
a thief; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall be dissolved with fervent
heat, and the earth and the works that are therein shall be burned up</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:11-15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I saw a great white
throne, and him that sat upon it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no place for
them. And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne; and books were opened: and another
book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of the things that were written in the books,
according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead that were in it; and death and Hades gave up the dead that
<pb n='1012'/><anchor id='Pg1012'/>
were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works. And death and Hades were cast into the lake
of fire. This is the second death, even the lake of fire. And if any was not found written in the book of life, he was
cast into the lake of fire.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Here is abundant evidence that there is no interval of a thousand years between the
second coming of Christ and the resurrection, general judgment, and end of all things.
All these events come together. The only answer of the premillennialists to this
objection to their theory is, that the day of judgment and the millennium may be contemporaneous,&mdash;in
other words, the day of judgment may be a thousand years long.
Elliott holds to a conflagration, partial at the beginning of this period, complete at its
close,&mdash;Peter's prophecy treating the two conflagrations as one, while the book of
Revelation separates them; so a nearer view resolves binary stars into two. But we
reply that, if the judgment occupies the whole period of a thousand years, then the
coming of Christ, the resurrection, and the final conflagration should all be a thousand
years also. It is indeed possible that, in this case, as Peter says in connection with his
prophecy of judgment, <q><hi rend='italic'>one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 3:8</hi>). But if we make the word <q><emph>day</emph></q> so indefinite in connection with the judgment,
why should we regard it as so definite, when we come to interpret the 1260 days?
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That the literal interpretation of the passage&mdash;holding, as it does,
to a resurrection of bodies of flesh and blood, and to a reign of the risen
saints in the flesh, and in the world as at present constituted&mdash;is inconsistent
with other Scriptural declarations with regard to the spiritual nature
of the resurrection-body and of the coming reign of Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:44, 50</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>it is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body.... Now this I say, brethren, that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.</hi></q> These passages
are inconsistent with the view that the resurrection is a physical resurrection at the
beginning of the thousand years&mdash;a resurrection to be followed by a second life of the
saints in bodies of flesh and blood. They are not, however, inconsistent with the true
view, soon to be mentioned, that <q><hi rend='italic'>the first resurrection</hi></q> is simply the raising of the church
to a new life and zeal. Westcott, Bib. Com. on <hi rend='italic'>John 14:18, 19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I will not leave you desolate</hi>
[marg.: <q><hi rend='italic'>orphans</hi></q>]: <hi rend='italic'>I come unto you. Yet a little while, and the world beholdeth me no more; but ye behold
me</hi></q>:&mdash;<q>The words exclude the error of those who suppose that Christ will <q>come</q>
under the same conditions of earthly existence as those to which he submitted at his
first coming.</q> See Hovey, Bib. Eschatology, 66-78.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) That the literal interpretation is generally and naturally connected
with the expectation of a gradual and necessary decline of Christ's kingdom
upon earth, until Christ comes to bind Satan and to introduce the millennium.
This view not only contradicts such passages as Dan. 2:34, 35, and
Mat. 13:31, 32, but it begets a passive and hopeless endurance of evil,
whereas the Scriptures enjoin a constant and aggressive warfare against it,
upon the very ground that God's power shall assure to the church a
gradual but constant progress in the face of it, even to the time of the end.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Dan. 2:34, 35</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon its feet that
were of iron and clay, and brake them in pieces. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken
in pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshing-floors; and the wind carried them away, so that no
place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 13:31, 32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his
field: which indeed is less than all seeds; but when it is grown, it is greater than the herbs, and becometh a tree, so
that the birds of the heaven come and lodge in the branches thereof.</hi></q> In both these figures there is no
sign of cessation or of backward movement, but rather every indication of continuous
advance to complete victory and dominion. The premillennial theory supposes that for
the principle of development under the dispensation of the Holy Spirit, God will substitute
a reign of mere power and violence. J. B. Thomas: <q>The kingdom of heaven is
like a grain of mustard seed, not like a can of nitro-glycerine.</q> Leighton Williams:
<q>The kingdom of God is to be realized on earth, not by a cataclysm, apart from effort
and will, but through the universal dissemination of the gospel all but lost to the
world.</q> E. G. Robinson: <q>Second Adventism stultifies the system and scheme of
Christianity.</q> Dr. A. J. Gordon could not deny that the early disciples were mistaken
<pb n='1013'/><anchor id='Pg1013'/>
in expecting the end of the world in their day. So we may be. Scripture does not
declare that the end should come in the lifetime of the apostles, and no definite date is
set. <q><hi rend='italic'>After a long time</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:19</hi>) and <q><hi rend='italic'>the falling away come first</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 2:3</hi>) are expressions
which postpone indefinitely. Yet a just view of Christ's coming as ever possible in the
immediate future may make us as faithful as were the original disciples.
</p>

<p>
The theory also divests Christ of all kingly power until the millennium, or, rather,
maintains that the kingdom has not yet been given to him; see Elliott, Horæ Apocalypticæ,
1:94&mdash;where <hi rend='italic'>Luke 19:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>A certain nobleman went into a far country, to receive for himself a
kingdom, and to return</hi></q>&mdash;is interpreted as follows: <q>Subordinate kings went to Rome to
receive the investiture to their kingdoms from the Roman Emperor, and then returned
to occupy them and reign. So Christ received from his Father, after his ascension, the
investiture to his kingdom; but with the intention not to occupy it, till his return at
his second coming. In token of this investiture he takes his seat as the Lamb on the
divine throne</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 5:6-8</hi>). But this interpretation contradicts <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 28:18, 20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>All authority
hath been given unto me in heaven and on earth ... lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.</hi></q>
See Presb. Rev., 1882:228. On the effects of the premillennial view in weakening
Christian endeavor, see J. H. Seelye, Christian Missions, 94-127; <hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>, see A. J.
Gordon, in Independent, Feb. 1886.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) We may therefore best interpret Rev. 20:4-10 as teaching in highly
figurative language, not a preliminary resurrection of the body, in the case
of departed saints, but a period in the later days of the church militant
when, under special influence of the Holy Ghost, the spirit of the martyrs
shall appear again, true religion be greatly quickened and revived, and the
members of Christ's churches become so conscious of their strength in
Christ that they shall, to an extent unknown before, triumph over the
powers of evil both within and without. So the spirit of Elijah appeared
again in John the Baptist (Mal. 4:5; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Mat. 11:13, 14). The fact that
only the spirit of sacrifice and faith is to be revived is figuratively indicated
in the phrase: <q>The rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand
years should be finished</q> = the spirit of persecution and unbelief shall be,
as it were, laid to sleep. Since resurrection, like the coming of Christ
and the judgment, is twofold, first, spiritual (the raising of the soul to
spiritual life), and secondly, physical (the raising of the body from the
grave), the words in Rev. 20:5&mdash;<q>this is the first resurrection</q>&mdash;seem
intended distinctly to preclude the literal interpretation we are combating.
In short, we hold that Rev. 20:4-10 does not describe the events commonly
called the second advent and resurrection, but rather describes great spiritual
changes in the later history of the church, which are typical of, and
preliminary to, the second advent and resurrection, and therefore, after
the prophetic method, are foretold in language literally applicable only to
those final events themselves (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Ez. 37:1-14; Luke 15:32).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mal. 4:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and terrible day of Jehovah come</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mat.
11:13, 14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John. And if ye are willing to receive it, this is Elijah,
that is to come</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ez. 37:1-14</hi>&mdash;the vision of the valley of dry bones = either the political or
the religious resuscitation of the Jews; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 15:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>this thy brother was dead, and is alive again</hi></q>&mdash;of
the prodigal son. It will help us in our interpretation of <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:4-10</hi> to notice that
death, judgment, the coming of Christ, and the resurrection, are all of two kinds, the
first spiritual, and the second literal:
</p>

<p>
(1) First, a spiritual death (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 2:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>dead through your trespasses and sins</hi></q>); and secondly, a
physical and literal death, whose culmination is found in the second death (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And
death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death, even the lake of fire</hi></q>).
</p>

<p>
(2) First, a spiritual judgment (<hi rend='italic'>Is. 26:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when thy judgments are in the earth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 12:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now
is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>3:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that believeth not hath been
judged already</hi></q>); and secondly, an outward and literal judgment (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 17:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>hath appointed a
day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he hath ordained</hi></q>).
</p>

<pb n='1014'/><anchor id='Pg1014'/>

<p>
(3) First, the spiritual and invisible coming of Christ (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 16:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>shall in no wise taste of
death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom</hi></q>&mdash;at the destruction of Jerusalem; <hi rend='italic'>John 14:16,
18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>another Comforter ... I come unto you</hi></q>&mdash;at Pentecost; <hi rend='italic'>14:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And if I go and prepare a place for you,
I come again, and will receive you unto myself</hi></q>&mdash;at death); and secondly, a visible literal coming
(<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the angels with him</hi></q>).
</p>

<p>
(4) First, a spiritual resurrection (<hi rend='italic'>John 5:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The hour cometh, and now is, when the dead shall hear
the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live</hi></q>); and secondly, a physical and literal resurrection
(<hi rend='italic'>John 5:28, 29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the hour cometh, in which all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment</hi></q>).
The spiritual resurrection foreshadows the bodily resurrection.
</p>

<p>
This twofoldness of each of the four terms, death, judgment, coming of Christ, resurrection,
is so obvious a teaching of Scripture, that the apostle's remark in <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>This
is the first resurrection</hi></q>&mdash;seems distinctly intended to warn the reader against drawing the
premillenarian inference, and to make clear the fact that the resurrection spoken of is
the first or spiritual resurrection,&mdash;an interpretation which is made indubitable by his
proceeding, further on, to describe the outward and literal resurrection in <hi rend='italic'>verse 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And
the sea gave up the dead that were in it: and death and Hades gave up the dead that were in them.</hi></q> This
physical resurrection takes place when <q><hi rend='italic'>the thousand years</hi></q> are <q><hi rend='italic'>finished</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>verse 5</hi>).
</p>

<p>
This interpretation suggests a possible way of reconciling the premillenarian and
postmillenarian theories, without sacrificing any of the truth in either of them.
Christ may come again, at the beginning of the millennium, in a spiritual way, and his
saints may reign with him spiritually, in the wonderful advances of his kingdom; while
the visible, literal coming may take place at the end of the thousand years. Dorner's
view is postmillennial, in this sense, that the visible coming of Christ will be after the
thousand years. Hengstenberg curiously regards the millennium as having begun in
the Middle Ages (800-1800 A. D.). This strange view of an able interpreter, as well as
the extraordinary diversity of explanations given by others, convinces us that no
exegete has yet found the key to the mysteries of the Apocalypse. Until we know
whether the preaching of the gospel in the whole world (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 24:14</hi>) is to be a preaching
to nations as a whole, or to each individual in each nation, we cannot determine whether
the millennium has already begun, or whether it is yet far in the future.
</p>

<p>
The millennium then is to be the culmination of the work of the Holy Spirit, a universal
revival of religion, a nation born in a day, the kings of the earth bringing their
glory and honor into the city of God. A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 211&mdash;<q>After
the present elective work of the Spirit has been completed, there will come a
time of universal blessing, when the Spirit shall literally be poured out upon all flesh,
when that which is perfect shall come and that which is in part shall be done away....
The early rain of the Spirit was at Pentecost; the latter rain will be at the Parousia.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. H. Strong, Sermon before the Baptist World Congress, London, July 12, 1905&mdash;<q>Let
us expect the speedy spiritual coming of the Lord. I believe in an ultimate literal and
visible coming of Christ in the clouds of heaven to raise the dead, to summon all men
to the judgment, and to wind up the present dispensation. But I believe that this
visible and literal coming of Christ must be preceded, and prepared for, by his invisible
and spiritual coming and by a resurrection of faith and love in the hearts of his people.
<q><hi rend='italic'>This is the first resurrection</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:5</hi>). I read in Scripture of a spiritual second coming that
precedes the literal, an inward revelation of Christ to his people, a restraining of the
powers of darkness, a mighty augmentation of the forces of righteousness, a turning
to the Lord of men and nations, such as the world has not yet seen. I believe in a long
reign of Christ on earth, in which his saints shall in spirit be caught up with him, and
shall sit with him upon his throne, even though this muddy vesture of decay compasses
them about, and the time of their complete glorification has not yet come. Let
us hasten the coming of the day of God by our faith and prayer. <q><hi rend='italic'>When the Son of man
cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 18:8</hi>). Let him find faith, at least in us. Our faith
can certainly secure the coming of the Lord into our hearts. Let us expect that Christ
will be revealed in us, as of old he was revealed in the Apostle Paul.</q>
</p>

<p>
Our own interpretation of <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:1-10</hi>, was first given, for substance, by Whitby. He
was followed by Vitringa and Faber. For a fuller elaboration of it, see Brown, Second
Advent, 206-259; Hodge, Outlines of Theology, 447-453. For the postmillennial view
generally, see Kendrick, in Bap. Quar., Jan. 1870; New Englander, 1874:356; 1879:47-49,
114-147; Pepper, in Bap. Rev., 1880:15; Princeton Review, March, 1879:415-434; Presb.
Rev., 1883:221-252; Bib. Sac., 15:381, 625; 17:111; Harris, Kingdom of Christ, 220-237;
Waldegrave, Bampton Lectures for 1854, on the Millennium; Neander, Planting and
Training, 526, 527; Cowles, Dissertation on Premillennial Advent, in Com. on Jeremiah
<pb n='1015'/><anchor id='Pg1015'/>
and Ezekiel; Weiss, Premillennial Advent; Crosby, Second Advent; Fairbairn on
Prophecy, 432-480; Woods, Works, 3:267; Abp. Whately, Essays on Future State. For
the premillennial view, see Elliott, Horæ Apocalypticæ, 4:140-196; William Kelly,
Advent of Christ Premillennial; Taylor, Voice of the Church on the Coming and Kingdom
of the Redeemer; Litch, Christ Yet to Come.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. The Resurrection.</head>

<p>
While the Scriptures describe the impartation of new life to the soul in
regeneration as a spiritual resurrection, they also declare that, at the second
coming of Christ, there shall be a resurrection of the body, and a reunion
of the body to the soul from which, during the intermediate state, it has
been separated. Both the just and the unjust shall have part in the resurrection.
To the just, it shall be a resurrection unto life; and the body shall
be a body like Christ's&mdash;a body fitted for the uses of the sanctified spirit.
To the unjust, it shall be a resurrection unto condemnation; and analogy
would seem to indicate that, here also, the outward form will fitly represent
the inward state of the soul&mdash;being corrupt and deformed as is the soul
which inhabits it. Those who are living at Christ's coming shall receive
spiritual bodies without passing through death. As the body after corruption
and dissolution, so the outward world after destruction by fire, shall be
rehabilitated and fitted for the abode of the saints.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Passages describing a spiritual resurrection are: <hi rend='italic'>John 5:24-27</hi>, especially <hi rend='italic'>25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The hour
cometh, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:4, 5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as
Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also might walk in newness of life. For if we
have become united with him by the likeness of his death, we shall be also by the likeness of his resurrection</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph.
2:1, 5, 6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And you did he make alive, when ye were dead through your trespasses and sins ... even when we
were dead through our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ ... and raised us up with him, and made us
to sit with him in the heavenly places, in Christ Jesus</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead,
and Christ shall shine upon thee.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 2:12,
13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>having been buried with him in baptism, wherein ye were also raised with him through faith in the working of
God, who raised him from the dead. And you, being dead through your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh,
you, I say, did he make alive together with him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Is. 26:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Thy dead shall live; my dead bodies shall arise.
Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast forth the dead</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Ez. 37:1-14</hi>&mdash;the valley of dry bones: <q><hi rend='italic'>I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves,
O my people; and I will bring you into the land of Israel.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Passages describing a literal and physical resurrection are: <hi rend='italic'>Job 14:12-15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>So man lieth down
and riseth not: Till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, Nor be raised out of their sleep. Oh that thou wouldest
hide me in Sheol, That thou wouldest keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, That thou wouldest appoint me a set time,
and remember me! If a man die, shall he live again? All the days of my warfare would I wait, Till my release should
come. Thou wouldest call, and I would answer thee: Thou wouldest have a desire to the work of thy hands</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John
5:28, 29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the hour cometh, in which all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shalt come forth: they that
have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 24:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>having hope toward God ... that there shall be a resurrection both of the just and unjust</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor.
15:13, 17, 22, 42, 51, 52</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if there is no resurrection of the dead, neither hath Christ been raised ... and if Christ
hath not been raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins ... as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be
made alive ... it is sown in corruption: it is raised in incorruption.... We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be
raised incorruptible</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be conformed to the
body of his glory, according to the working whereby he is able even to subject all things unto himself</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 4:14-16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For
if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also that are fallen asleep in Jesus will God bring
with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we that are alive, that are left unto the coming of the
Lord, shall in no wise precede them that are fallen asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven, with a shout,
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 3:7, 10, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the heavens that now are, and the earth, by the same word have been stored up for fire, being
reserved against the day of judgment and destruction of ungodly men.... But the day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night, which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall be dissolved with fervent
heat, and the earth and the works that are therein shall be burned up.... But, according to his promise, we look for
new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the sea gave up the dead that were
<pb n='1016'/><anchor id='Pg1016'/>
in it; and death and Hades gave up the dead that were in them</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>21:1, 5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I saw a new heaven and a new
earth: for the first heaven and the first earth are passed away; and the sea is no more.... And he that sitteth on the
throne said, Behold, I make all things new.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
The smooth face of death with the lost youth restored, and the pure white glow of the
marble statue with all passion gone and the lofty and heroic only visible, are indications
of what is to be. Art, in its representations alike of the human form, and of an ideal
earth and society in landscape and poem, is prophetic of the future,&mdash;it suggests the
glorious possibilities of the resurrection-morning. Nicoll, Life of Christ: <q>The river
runs through the lake and pursues its way beyond. So the life of faith passes through
death and is only purified thereby. As to the body, all that is worth saving will be
saved. Other resurrections [such as that of Lazarus] were resurrections to the old
conditions of earthly life; the resurrection of Christ was the revelation of new life.</q>
</p>

<p>
Stevens, Pauline Theology, 357 note&mdash;<q>If we could assume with confidence that the
report of Paul's speech before Felix accurately reproduced his language in detail, the
apostle's belief in a <q><hi rend='italic'>resurrection both of the just and of the unjust</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 24:15</hi>) would be securely
established: but, in view of the silence of his epistles, this assumption becomes a precarious
one. Paul speaks afterwards of <q><hi rend='italic'>attaining to the resurrection from the dead</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:11</hi>), as
if this did not belong to all.</q> The scepticism of Prof. Stevens seems to us entirely
needless and unjustified. It is the blessed resurrection to which Paul would <q>attain,</q>
and which he has in mind in Philippians, as in <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15</hi>&mdash;a fact perfectly consistent with
a resurrection of the wicked to <q><hi rend='italic'>shame and everlasting contempt</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Daniel 12:2; John 5:29</hi>).
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 205, 206&mdash;<q>The rapture of the saints (<hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 4:17</hi>)
is the earthly Christ rising to meet the heavenly Christ; the elect church, gathered in
the Spirit and named ὁ Χριστός (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 12:12</hi>), taken up to be united in glory with Christ
the head of the church, <q><hi rend='italic'>himself the Savior of the body</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 5:23</hi>). It is not by acting upon the
body of Christ from without, but by energizing it from within, that the Holy Ghost will
effect its glorification. In a word, the Comforter, who on the day of Pentecost came
down to form a body out of flesh, will at the Parousia return to heaven in that body,
having fashioned it like unto the body of Christ (<hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:31</hi>).... Here then is where the
lines of Christ's ministry terminate,&mdash;in sanctification, the perfection of the spirit's
holiness; and in resurrection, the perfection of the body's health.</q>
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson: <q>Personality is the indestructible principle&mdash;not intelligence, else
deny that infants have souls. Personality takes to itself a material organization. It is
a divinely empowered second cause. This refutes materialism and annihilationism. No
one pretends that the individual elements of the body will be raised. The individuality
only, the personal identity, will be preserved. The soul is the organific power. Medical
practice teaches that merely animal life is a mechanical process, but this is used by a
personal power. Materialism, on the contrary, would make the soul the product of the
body. Every man, in becoming a Christian, begins the process of resurrection. We do
not know <emph>but</emph> resurrection begins at the moment of dissolution, yet we do not know
<emph>that</emph> it does. But if Christ arose with identically the same body unchanged, how can his
resurrection be a type of ours? Answer: The nature of Christ's resurrection body is
an open question.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Upon the subject of the resurrection, our positive information is derived
wholly from the word of God. Further discussion of it may be most
naturally arranged in a series of answers to objections. The objections
commonly urged against the doctrine, as above propounded, may be
reduced to two:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. The exegetical objection.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The exegetical objection</hi>,&mdash;that it rests upon a literalizing of metaphorical
language, and has no sufficient support in Scripture. To this we
answer:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That, though the phrase <q>resurrection of the body</q> does not occur
in the New Testament, the passages which describe the event indicate a
physical, as distinguished from a spiritual, change (John 5:28, 29; Phil.
3:21; 1 Thess. 4:13-17). The phrase <q>spiritual body</q> (1 Cor. 15:44)
is a contradiction in terms, if it be understood as signifying <q>a body which
is simple spirit.</q> It can only be interpreted as meaning a material
<pb n='1017'/><anchor id='Pg1017'/>
organism, perfectly adapted to be the outward expression and vehicle of the
purified soul. The purely spiritual interpretation is, moreover, expressly
excluded by the apostolic denial that <q>the resurrection is past already</q>
(2 Tim. 2:18), and by the fact that there is a resurrection of the unjust, as
well as of the just (Acts 24:15).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 5:28, 29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall come forth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who shall fashion
anew the body of our humiliation</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Thess. 4:16, 17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven, with a shout,
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:44</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>it is
sown a natural</hi> [marg.: <q><hi rend='italic'>psychical</hi></q>] <hi rend='italic'>body; it is raised a spiritual body</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 2:17, 18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Hymenæus and
Philetus; men who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of
some</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 24:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Having hope toward God ... that there shall be a resurrection both of the just and the unjust.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:44</hi>, the word ψυχικόν, translated <q><hi rend='italic'>natural</hi></q> or <q><hi rend='italic'>psychical</hi>,</q> is derived from the
Greek word ψυχή, soul, just as the word πνευματικόν, translated <q><hi rend='italic'>spiritual</hi>,</q> is derived from
the Greek word πνεῦμα, spirit. And as Paul could not mean to say that this earthly
body is composed of soul, neither does he say that the resurrection body is composed of
<emph>spirit</emph>. In other words, these adjectives <q><emph>psychical</emph></q> and <q><emph>spiritual</emph></q> do not define the
<emph>material</emph> of the respective bodies, but describe those bodies in their relations and
adaptations, in their powers and uses. The present body is adapted and designed for
the use of the soul; the resurrection body will be adapted and designed for the use of
the spirit.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 2:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>saying that the resurrection is past already</hi></q> = undue contempt for the body came to
regard the resurrection as a purely spiritual thing (Ellicott). Dr. A. J. Gordon said
that the <q><emph>spiritual body</emph></q> means <q>the body spiritualized.</q> E. H. Johnson: <q>The phrase
<q><emph>spiritual body</emph></q> describes not so much the nature of the body itself, as its relations to the
spirit.</q> Savage, Life after Death, 80&mdash;<q>Resurrection does not mean the raising up of
the body, and it does not mean the mere rising of the soul in the moment of death, but
a rising again from the prison house of the dead, after going down at the moment of
death.</q> D. R. Goodwin, Journ. Soc. Bib. Exegesis, 1881:84&mdash;<q>The spiritual body is
<emph>body</emph>, and not <emph>spirit</emph>, and therefore must come under the definition of <emph>body</emph>. If it were
to be mere spirit, then every man in the future state would have two spirits&mdash;the
spirit that he has here and another spirit received at the resurrection.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the redemption of Christ is declared to include the body as
well as the soul (Rom. 8:23; 1 Cor. 6:13-20). The indwelling of the
Holy Spirit has put such honor upon the frail mortal tenement which he
has made his temple, that God would not permit even this wholly to perish
(Rom. 8:11&mdash;διὰ τὸ ἐνοικοῦν αὐτοῦ πνεῦμα ἐν ὑμῖν, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, because of his indwelling
Spirit, God will raise up the mortal body). It is this belief which
forms the basis of Christian care for the dead (Phil. 3:21; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Mat. 22:32).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>waiting for our adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 6:13-20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Meats for the belly
and the belly for meats: but God shall bring to nought both it and them. But the body is not for fornication, but for
the Lord; and the Lord for the body: and God both raised the Lord, and will raise up us through his power.... But
he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit.... Or know ye not that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit
which is in you, which ye have from God?... glorify God therefore in your body</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But if the Spirit
of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwelleth in you, he that raised up Christ Jesus from the dead shall give life
also to your mortal bodies through his Spirit that dwelleth in you</hi></q>&mdash;here the Revised Version follows
Tisch., 8th ed., and Westcott and Hort's reading of διὰ τοῦ ἐνοικοῦντος αὐτοῦ πνεύματος.
Tregelles, Tisch., 7th ed., and Meyer, have διὰ τὸ ἐνοικοῦν αὐτοῦ πνεῦμα, and this reading
we regard as, on the whole, the best supported. <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>shall fashion anew the body of our
humiliation.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. R. D. Hitchcock, in South Church Lectures, 338, says that <q>there is no Scripture
declaration of the resurrection of the flesh, nor even of the resurrection of the body.</q>
While this is literally true, it conveys a false idea. The passages just cited foretell a
quickening of our mortal bodies, a raising of them up, a changing of them into the
likeness of Christ's body. Dorner, Eschatology: <q>The New Testament is not contented
with a bodiless immortality. It is opposed to a naked spiritualism, and accords completely
with a deeper philosophy which discerns in the body, not merely the sheath or
garment of the soul, but a side of the person belonging to his full idea, his mirror and
organ, of the greatest importance for his activity and history.</q>
</p>

<pb n='1018'/><anchor id='Pg1018'/>

<p>
Christ's proof of the resurrection in <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 22:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God is not the God of the dead, but of the living</hi></q>&mdash;has
for its basis this very assumption that soul and body belong normally together, and
that, since they are temporally separated in the case of the saints who live with God,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob shall rise again. The idealistic philosophy of thirty years
ago led to a contempt of the body; the recent materialism has done at least this service,
that it has reasserted the claims of the body to be a proper part of man.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That the nature of Christ's resurrection, as literal and physical,
determines the nature of the resurrection in the case of believers (Luke
24:36; John 20:27). As, in the case of Christ, the same body that was
laid in the tomb was raised again, although possessed of new and surprising
powers, so the Scriptures intimate, not simply that the saints shall
have bodies, but that these bodies shall be in some proper sense an outgrowth
or transformation of the very bodies that slept in the dust (Dan.
12:2; 1 Cor. 15:53, 54). The denial of the resurrection of the body, in
the case of believers, leads naturally to a denial of the reality of Christ's
resurrection (1 Cor. 15:13).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 24:39</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and
bones, as ye behold me having</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 20:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and see my hands;
and reach hither thy hand, and put it into my side: and be not faithless, but believing</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Dan. 12:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And many of
them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:53, 54</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.
But when this corruption shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall come
to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But if there is no resurrection of the dead,
neither hath Christ been raised.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Sadducean materialism and Gnostic dualism, which last held matter to be evil, both
denied the resurrection. Paul shows that to deny it is to deny that Christ rose; since, if
it were impossible in the case of his followers, it must have been impossible in his own
case. As believers, we are vitally connected with him; and his resurrection could not
have taken place without drawing in its train the resurrection of all of us. Having
denied that Christ rose, where is the proof that he is not still under the bond and curse
of death? Surely then our preaching is vain. Paul's epistle to the Corinthians was
written before the Gospels; and is therefore, as Hanna says, the earliest written account
of the resurrection. Christ's transfiguration was a prophecy of his resurrection.
</p>

<p>
S. S. Times, March 22, 1902:161&mdash;<q>The resurrection of Jesus was not a mere rising
again, like that of Lazarus and the son of the widow of Nain. He came forth from the
tomb so changed that he was not at once or easily recognized, and was possessed of such
new and surprising powers that he seemed to be pure spirit, no longer subject to the
conditions of his natural body. So he was the <q><hi rend='italic'>first-fruits</hi></q> of the resurrection-harvest
(<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:20</hi>). Our resurrection, in like manner, is to involve a change from a corruptible
body to an incorruptible, from a psychical to a spiritual.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) That the accompanying events, as the second coming and the judgment,
since they are themselves literal, imply that the resurrection is also
literal.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:19-23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the earnest expectation of the creation waiteth for the revealing of the sons of God ... the
whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now ... even we ourselves groan within ourselves,
waiting for our adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body</hi></q>&mdash;here man's body is regarded as a part of
nature, or the <q><emph>creation</emph>,</q> and as partaking in Christ of its deliverance from the curse;
<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:4, 5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he shall wipe away every tear from their eyes; and death shall be no more.... And he that sitteth
on the throne said, Behold, I make all things new</hi></q>&mdash;a declaration applicable to the body, the seat of
pain and the avenue of temptation, as well as to outward nature. See Hanna, The
Resurrection, 28; Fuller, Works, 3:291; Boston, Fourfold State, in Works, 8:271-289.
On Olshausen's view of immortality as inseparable from body, see Aids to the Study
of German Theology, 63. On resurrection of the flesh, see Jahrbuch f. d. Theol., 1:289-317.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. The scientific object.</head>

<p>
This is threefold:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That a resurrection of the particles which compose the body at
death is impossible, since they enter into new combinations, and not unfrequently
<pb n='1019'/><anchor id='Pg1019'/>
become parts of other bodies which the doctrine holds to be raised
at the same time.
</p>

<p>
We reply that the Scripture not only does not compel us to hold, but it
distinctly denies, that all the particles which exist in the body at death are
present in the resurrection-body (1 Cor. 15:37&mdash;οὐ τὸ σῶμα τὸ γενησόμενον;
50). The Scripture seems only to indicate a certain physical connection
between the new and the old, although the nature of this connection is not
revealed. So long as the physical connection is maintained, it is not necessary
to suppose that even a germ or particle that belonged to the old body
exists in the new.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:37, 38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that which thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that shall be, but a bare grain, it may chance
of wheat, or of some other kind; but God giveth it a body even as it pleased him, and to each seed a body of its own.</hi></q>
Jerome tells us that the risen saints <q>habent dentes, ventrem, genitalia, et tamen nec
cibis nec uxoribus indigent.</q> This view of the resurrection is exposed to the objection
mentioned above. Pollok's Course of Time represented the day of resurrection as a
day on which the limbs that had been torn asunder on earth hurtled through the air to
join one another once more. The amputated arm that has been buried in China must
traverse thousands of miles to meet the body of its former owner, as it rose from the
place of its burial in England.
</p>

<p>
There are serious difficulties attending this view. The bodies of the dead fertilized
the field of Waterloo. The wheat grown there has been ground and made into bread,
and eaten by thousands of living men. Particles of one human body have become
incorporated with the bodies of many others. <q>The Avon to the Severn runs, The
Severn to the sea, And Wycliffe's dust shall spread abroad, Wide as the waters be.</q>
Through the clouds and the rain, particles of Wycliffe's body may have entered into
the water which other men have drunk from their wells and fountains. There is a
propagation of disease by contagion, or the transmission of infinitesimal germs from
one body to another, sometimes by infection of the living from contact with the body
of a friend just dead. In these various ways, the same particle might, in the course of
history, enter into the constitution of a hundred living men. How can this one particle,
at the resurrection, be in a hundred places at the same time? <q>Like the woman
who had seven husbands, the same matter may belong in succession to many bodies,
for <q>they all had it</q></q> (Smyth). The cannibal and his victim cannot both possess the
same body at the resurrection. The Providence Journal had an article entitled: <q>Who
ate Roger Williams?</q> When his remains were exhumed, it was found that one large
root of an apple tree followed the spine, divided at the thighs, and turned up at the
toes of Roger Williams. More than one person had eaten its apples. This root may be
seen to-day in the cabinet of Brown University.
</p>

<p>
These considerations have led some, like Origen, to call the doctrine of a literal resurrection
of the flesh <q>the foolishness of beggarly minds,</q> and to say that resurrection
may be only <q>the gathering round the spirit of new materials, and the vitalizing them
into a new body by the spirit's God-given power</q>; see Newman Smyth, Old Faiths in a
New Light, 349-391; Porter, Human Intellect, 39. But this view seems as great an
extreme as that from which it was a reaction. It gives up all idea of unity between
the new and the old. If my body were this instant annihilated, and if then, an hour
hence, God should create a second body, precisely like the present, I could not call it
the same with the present body, even though it were animated by the same informing
soul, and that soul had maintained an uninterrupted existence between the time of the
annihilation of the first body and the creation of the second. So, if the body laid in
the tomb were wholly dissipated among the elements, and God created at the end of
the world a wholly new body, it would be impossible for Paul to say: <q><hi rend='italic'>this corruptible must
put on incorruption</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:53</hi>), or: <q><hi rend='italic'>it is sown in dishonor; it it raised in glory</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>verse 43</hi>). In short,
there is a physical connection between the old and the new, which is intimated by
Scripture, but which this theory denies.
</p>

<p>
Paul himself gives us an illustration which shows that his view was midway between
the two extremes: <q><hi rend='italic'>that which thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that shall be</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:37</hi>). On
the one hand, the wheat that springs up does not contain the precise particles, perhaps
does not contain any particles, that were in the seed. On the other hand, there has
been a continuous physical connection between the seed sown and the ripened grain at
the harvest. If the seed had been annihilated, and then ripe grain created, we could
<pb n='1020'/><anchor id='Pg1020'/>
not speak of identity between the one and the other. But, because there has been a
constant flux, the old particles pressed out by new, and these new in their turn succeeded
by others that take their places, we can say: <q>the wheat has come up.</q> We
bury grain in order to increase it. The resurrection-body will be the same with the
body laid away in the earth, in the same sense as the living stalk of grain is identical
with the seed from which it germinated. <q><hi rend='italic'>This mortal must put on immortality</hi></q>&mdash;not the
immortal spirit put on an immortal body, but the mortal body put on immortality,
the corruptible body put on incorruption (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:53</hi>). <q><hi rend='italic'>Ye know not the Scriptures, nor the
power of God</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mark 12:24</hi>), says our Lord; and Paul asks: <q><hi rend='italic'>Why is it judged incredible with you, if God
doth raise the dead?</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 26:8</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Or, to use another illustration nearer to the thing we desire to illustrate: My body is
the same that it was ten years ago, although physiologists declare that every particle of
the body is changed, not simply once in seven years, but once in a single year. Life is
preserved only by the constant throwing off of dead matter and the introduction of
new. There is indeed a unity of consciousness and personality, without which I should
not be able to say at intervals of years: <q>this body is the same; this body is mine.</q>
But a physical connection between the old and the new is necessary in addition.
</p>

<p>
The nails of the hands are renewed in less than four months, or about twenty-one
times in seven years. They grow to full length, an average of seven twelfths of an inch,
in from 121 to 138 days. Young people grow them more rapidly, old people more slowly.
In a man of 21, it took 126 days; in a man of 67, it took 244; but the average was a third
of a year. A Baptist pastor attempted to prove that he was a native of South Carolina
though born in another state, upon the ground that the body he brought with him
from Tennessee had exchanged its physical particles for matter taken from South
Carolina. Two dentists, however, maintained that he still had the same teeth which he
owned in Tennessee seven years before, there being no circulation in the enamel.
Should we then say: Every particle of the body has changed, except the enamel of the
teeth?
</p>

<p>
Pope's Martinus Scriblerus: <q>Sir John Cutler had a pair of black worsted stockings
which his maid darned so often with silk that they became at last a pair of silk stockings.</q>
Adeney, in Christianity and Evolution, 122, 123&mdash;<q>Herod's temple was treated
as identical with the temple that Haggai knew, because the rebuilding was gradual, and
was carried on side by side with the demolition of the several parts of the old structure.</q>
The ocean wave travels around the world and is the same wave; but it is never
in two consecutive seconds composed of the same particles of water.
</p>

<p>
The North River is the same to-day that it was when Hendrick Hudson first discovered
it; yet not a particle of its current, nor the surface of the banks which that current
touches now, is the same that it was then. Two things make the present river identical
with the river of the past. The first is, that the same formative principle is at work,&mdash;the
trend of the banks is the same, and there is the same general effect in the flow and
direction of the waters drained from a large area of country. The second is, the fact
that, ever since Hendrick Hudson's time, there has been a physical connection, old
particles in continuous succession having been replaced by new.
</p>

<p>
So there are two things requisite to make our future bodies one with the bodies we
now inhabit: first, that the same formative principle be at work in them; and secondly,
that there be some sort of physical connection between the body that now is and the
body that shall be. What that physical connection is, it is vain to speculate. We only
teach that, though there may not be a single material particle in the new that was present
in the old, there yet will be such a physical connection that it can be said: <q>the new
has grown out of the old</q>; <q>that which was in the grave has come forth</q>; <q>this
mortal has put on immortality.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That a resurrection-body, having such a remote physical connection
with the present body, cannot be recognized by the inhabiting soul or by
other witnessing spirits as the same with that which was laid in the grave.
</p>

<p>
To this we reply that bodily identity does not consist in absolute sameness
of particles during the whole history of the body, but in the organizing
force, which, even in the flux and displacement of physical particles, makes
the old the basis of the new, and binds both together in the unity of a
single consciousness. In our recognition of friends, moreover, we are not
wholly dependent, even in this world, upon our perception of bodily form;
<pb n='1021'/><anchor id='Pg1021'/>
and we have reason to believe that in the future state there may be methods
of communication far more direct and intuitive than those with which we
are familiar here.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 17:3, 4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elijah talking with him. And Peter answered,
and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, I will make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and
one for Moses, and one for Elijah</hi></q>&mdash;here there is no mention of information given to Peter as to
the names of the celestial visitants; it would seem that, in his state of exalted sensibility,
he at once knew them. The recent proceedings of the English Society for Psychical
Research seem to indicate the possibility of communication between two minds
without physical intermediaries. Hudson, Scientific Demonstration of a Future Life,
294, 295, holds that telepathy is the means of communication in the future state.
</p>

<p>
G. S. Fullerton, Sameness and Identity, 6, 32, 67&mdash;<q>Heracleitus of Ephesus declared
it impossible to enter the same river twice. Cratylus replied that the same river could
not be entered once.... The kinds of sameness are: 1. Thing same <emph>with itself</emph> at
any one instant; 2. Same pain to-day I felt yesterday = a <emph>like</emph> pain; 3. I See the same
tree at different times = two or more percepts represent the same object; 4. Two plants
belonging to the same <emph>class</emph> are called the same; 5. Memory gives us the same object
that we formerly perceived; but the object is not the past, it is the <emph>memory-image</emph>
which represents it; 6. Two men perceive the same object = they have like percepts,
while both percepts are only representative of the same object; 7. External thing
same with its representative in consciousness, or with the substance or noumenon
supposed to underlie it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ladd, Philosophy of Mind, 153, 255&mdash;<q>What is called <q>remaining the same,</q> in the case
of all organic beings is just this,&mdash;remaining faithful to some immanent idea, while
undergoing a great variety of changes in the pursuit, as it were, of the idea.... Self-consciousness
and memory are themselves processes of becoming. The mind that does
not change, in the way of growth, has no claim to be called mind. One cannot be conscious
of changes without also being conscious of being the very being that is changed.
When he loses this consciousness, we say that <q>he has lost his mind.</q> Amid changes of
its ideas the ego remains permanent because it is held within limits by the power of
some immanent idea.... Our bodies as such have only a formal existence. They are
a stream in constant flow and are ever changing. My body is only a temporary loan
from Nature, to be repaid at death.</q>
</p>

<p>
With regard to the meaning of the term <q>identity,</q> as applied to material things, see
Porter, Human Intellect, 631&mdash;<q>Here the substance is called the same, by a loose analogy
taken from living agents and their gradual accretion and growth.</q> The Euphrates
is the same stream that flowed, <q>When high in Paradise By the four rivers the first
roses blew,</q> even though after that time the flood, or deluge, stopped its flow and
obliterated all the natural features of the landscape. So this flowing organism which
we call the body may be the same, after the deluge of death has passed away.
</p>

<p>
A different and less satisfactory view is presented in Dorner's Eschatology: <q>Identity
involves: 1. Plastic form, which for the earthly body had its moulding principle in the
soul. That principle could effect nothing permanent in the intermediate state; but
with the spiritual consummation of the soul, it attains the full power which can appropriate
to itself the heavenly body, accompanied by a cosmical process, made like Christ.
2. Appropriation, from the world of elements, of what it needs. The elements into
which everything bodily of earth is dissolved, are an essentially uniform mass, like an
ocean; and it is indifferent what parts of this are assigned to each individual man. The
whole world of substance, which makes the constant change of substance possible, is
made over to humanity as a common possession (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 4:32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>not one of them said that aught of the
things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common</hi></q>).</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That a material organism can only be regarded as a hindrance to the
free activity of the spirit, and that the assumption of such an organism by
the soul, which, during the intermediate state, had been separated from the
body, would indicate a decline in dignity and power rather than a progress.
</p>

<p>
We reply that we cannot estimate the powers and capacities of matter,
when brought by God into complete subjection to the spirit. The bodies
of the saints may be more ethereal than the air, and capable of swifter
motion than the light, and yet be material in their substance. That the
<pb n='1022'/><anchor id='Pg1022'/>
soul, clothed with its spiritual body, will have more exalted powers and
enjoy a more complete felicity than would be possible while it maintained
a purely spiritual existence, is evident from the fact that Paul represents
the culmination of the soul's blessedness as occurring, not at death, but at
the resurrection of the body.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>waiting for our adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>not for that we would be
unclothed; but that we would be clothed upon, that what is mortal may be swallowed up of life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil. 3:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>if by
any means I may attain unto the resurrection from the dead.</hi></q> Even <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 86:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Unite my heart to fear thy name</hi></q>&mdash;may
mean the collecting of all the powers of the body as well as soul. In this respect
for the body, as a normal part of man's being, Scripture is based upon the truest philosophy.
Plotinus gave thanks that he was not tied to an immortal body, and refused to
have his portrait taken, because the body was too contemptible a thing to have its
image perpetuated. But this is not natural, nor is it probably anything more than a
whim or affectation. <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 5:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>no man ever hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it.</hi></q>
What we desire is not the annihilation of the body, but its perfection.
</p>

<p>
Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 188&mdash;<q>In the Egyptian Book of the Dead, the soul reunites
itself to the body, with the assurance that they shall never again be separated.</q> McCosh,
Intuitions, 213&mdash;<q>The essential thing about the resurrection is the development,
out of the dead body, of an organ for the communion and activity of the spiritual
life.</q> Ebrard, Dogmatik, 2:226-234, has interesting remarks upon the relation of the
resurrection-body to the present body. The essential difference he considers to be this,
that whereas, in the present body, matter is master of the spirit, in the resurrection-body
spirit will be the master of matter, needing no reparation by food, and having
control of material laws. Ebrard adds striking speculations with regard to the glorified
body of Christ.
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 126&mdash;<q><emph>Now</emph> the body bears the spirit, a slow
chariot whose wheels are often disabled, and whose swiftest motion is but labored and
tardy. <emph>Then</emph> the spirit will bear the body, carrying it as on wings of thought whithersoever
it will. The Holy Ghost, by his divine inworking will, has completed in us the
divine likeness, and perfected over us the divine dominion. The human body will now
be in sovereign subjection to the human spirit, and the human spirit to the divine
Spirit, and God will be all in all.</q> Newman Smyth, Place of Death in Evolution, 112&mdash;<q>Weismann
maintains that the living germ not only persists and is potentially immortal,
but also that under favorable conditions it seems capable of surrounding itself
with a new body. If a vital germ can do this, why not a spiritual germ?</q> Two martyrs
were led to the stake. One was blind, the other lame. As the fires kindled, the latter
exclaimed: <q>Courage, brother! this fire will cure us both!</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We may sum up our answers to objections, and may at the same time
throw light upon the doctrine of the resurrection, by suggesting four principles
which should govern our thinking with regard to the subject,&mdash;these
namely: 1. Body is in continual flux; 2. Since matter is but the manifestation
of God's mind and will, body is plastic in God's hands; 3. The soul in
complete union with God may be endowed with the power of God; 4. Soul
determines body, and not body soul, as the materialist imagines.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Ice, the flowing stream, the waterfall with the rainbow upon it, steam with its power
to draw the railway train or to burst the boiler of the locomotive, are all the same element
in varied forms, and they are all <emph>material</emph>. Wundt regards physical development,
not as the cause, but as the effect, of psychical development. Aristotle defines the soul
as <q>the prime entelechy of the living body.</q> Swedenborg regarded each soul here as
fashioning its own spiritual body, either hideous or lovely. Spenser, A Hymne to
Beautie: <q>For of the soul the body form doth take, For soul is form, and doth the
body make.</q> Wordsworth, Sonnet 36, Afterthought: <q>Far backward, Duddon, as I
cast my eyes, I see what was, and is, and will abide; Still glides the stream, and shall not
cease to glide; The Form remains, the Function never dies</q>; The Primrose of the
Rock: <q>Sin-blighted as we are, we too, The reasoning sons of men, From one oblivious
winter called, Shall rise and breathe again, And in eternal summer lose Our three-score
years and ten. To humbleness of heart descends This prescience from on high. The
faith that elevates the just Before and when they die, And makes each soul a separate
<pb n='1023'/><anchor id='Pg1023'/>
heaven, A court for Deity.</q> Robert Browning, Asolando: <q>One who never turned
his back, but marched breastforward; Never doubted clouds would break; Never
dreamed, though right were worsted, Wrong would triumph; Held we fall to rise, are
baffled to fight better, Sleep to wake.</q> Mrs. Browning: <q>God keeps a niche In heaven
to hold our idols, and albeit He broke them to our faces and denied That our close
kisses should impair their white, I know we shall behold them raised, complete, The
dust shook off, their beauty glorified.</q>
</p>

<p>
On the spiritual body as possibly evolved by will, see Harris, Philos. Basis of Theism,
386. On the nature of the resurrection-body, see Burnet, State of the Departed, chaps.
3 and 8; Cudworth, Intell. System, 3:310 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Splittgerber, Tod, Fortleben and Auferstehung.
On the doctrine of the Resurrection among the Egyptians, see Dr. Howard
Osgood, in Hebrew Student, Feb. 1885; among the Jews, see Gröbler, in Studien und
Kritiken, 1879: Heft 4; DeWünsche, in Jahrbuch f. prot. Theol., 1880: Heft 2 and 4;
Revue Théologique, 1881:1-17. For the view that the resurrection is wholly spiritual
and takes place at death, see Willmarth, in Bap. Quar., October, 1868, and April, 1870;
Ladd, in New Englander, April, 1874; Crosby, Second Advent.
</p>

<p>
On the whole subject, see Hase, Hutterus Redivivus, 280; Herzog, Encyclop., art.;
Auferstehung; Goulburn, Bampton Lectures for 1850, on the Resurrection; Cox, The
Resurrection; Neander, Planting and Training, 479-487, 524-526; Naville, La Vie Éternelle,
253, 254; Delitzsch, Bib. Psychologie, 453-463; Moorhouse, Nature and Revelation,
87-112; Unseen Universe, 33; Hovey, in Baptist Quarterly, Oct. 1867; Westcott, Revelation
of the Risen Lord, and in Contemporary Review, vol. 30; R. W. Macan, Resurrection
of Christ; Cremer, Beyond the Grave.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. The Last Judgment.</head>

<p>
While the Scriptures represent all punishment of individual transgressors
and all manifestations of God's vindicatory justice in the history of nations
as acts or processes of judgment, they also intimate that these temporal
judgments are only partial and imperfect, and that they are therefore to be
concluded with a final and complete vindication of God's righteousness.
This will be accomplished by making known to the universe the characters
of all men, and by awarding to them corresponding destinies.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Passages describing temporal or spiritual judgment are: <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 9:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He hath prepared his throne
for judgment</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Is. 26:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 16:27, 28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then shall he render unto
every man according to his deeds. Verily I say unto you, There be some of them that stand here, who shall in no wise
taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 3:18, 19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that believeth not hath been
judged already, because he hath not believed on the name of the only begotten Son of God. And this is the judgment, that
the light is come into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than the light; for their works were evil</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>9:39</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For
judgment came I into this world, that they that see not may see; and that they that see may become blind</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>12:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Passages describing the final judgment are: <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:31-46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But when the Son of man shall come
in his glory, and all the angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered
all the nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats....</hi></q>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 17:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he hath appointed a day, in which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he hath
ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 2:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in
the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, according to my gospel, by Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For we must
all be made manifest before the judgment-seat of Christ; that each one may receive the things done in the body, according
to what he hath done, whether it be good or bad</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 9:27, 28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And inasmuch as it is appointed unto men once to
die, and after this cometh judgment; so Christ also, having been once offered to bear the sins of many, shall appear a
second time, apart from sin, to them that wait for him, unto salvation</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I saw the dead, the great
and the small, standing before the throne; and books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of
life: and the dead were judged out of the things which were written in the books, according to their works.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Delitzsch: <q>The fall of Jerusalem was the day of the Lord, the bloody and fiery dawn
of the last great day&mdash;the day of days, the ending-day of all days, the settling day of
all days, the day of the promotion of time into eternity, the day which for the church
breaks through and breaks off the night of this present world.</q> E. G. Robinson:
<q>Judgment begins here. The callousing of conscience in this life is a penal infliction.
Punishment begins in this life and is carried on in the next. We have no right to assert
that there are no positive inflictions, but, if there are none, still every word of Scripture
<pb n='1024'/><anchor id='Pg1024'/>
threatening would stand. There is no <emph>day</emph> of judgment or of resurrection all at one
time. Judgment is an eternal process. The angels in <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 2:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>cast ... down to hell</hi></q>&mdash;suffer
the self-perpetuating consequences of transgression..... Man is being judged
every day. Every man honest with himself knows where he is going to. Those who
are not honest with themselves are playing a trick, and, if they are not careful, they
will get a trick played on them.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. The nature of the final judgment.</head>

<p>
The final judgment is not a spiritual, invisible, endless process, identical
with God's providence in history, but is an outward and visible event,
occurring at a definite period in the future. This we argue from the following
considerations:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The judgment is something for which the evil are <q>reserved </q> (2
Peter 2:4, 9); something to be expected in the future (Acts 24:25; Heb.
10:27); something after death (Heb. 9:27); something for which the
resurrection is a preparation (John 5:29).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 2:4, 9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>God spared not angels when they sinned, but cast them down to hell ... reserved unto judgment
... the lord knoweth how ... to keep the unrighteous unto punishment unto the day of judgment</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 24:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>as
he reasoned of righteousness, and self-control, and the judgment to come, Felix was terrified</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>a
certain fearful expectation of judgment</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>9:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>it is appointed unto men once to die, and after this cometh judgment</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>John 5:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the resurrection of judgment.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The accompaniments of the judgment, such as the second coming of
Christ, the resurrection, and the outward changes of the earth, are events
which have an outward and visible, as well as an inward and spiritual,
aspect. We are compelled to interpret the predictions of the last judgment
upon the same principle.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 5:28, 29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Marvel not at this: for the hour cometh, in which all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice,
and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection
of judgment</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 3:7, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the day of judgment ... the day of the Lord ... in the which the heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall be dissolved with fervent heat</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 1:7, 8, 2:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the
revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with the angels of his power in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to
them that know not God ... when he shall come ... in that day.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) God's justice, in the historical and imperfect work of judgment,
needs a final outward judgment as its vindication. <q>A perfect justice must
judge, not only moral units, but moral aggregates; not only the particulars
of life, but the life as a whole.</q> The crime that is hidden and triumphant
here, and the goodness that is here maligned and oppressed, must be
brought to light and fitly recompensed. <q>Otherwise man is a Tantalus&mdash;longing
but never satisfied</q>; and God's justice, of which his outward
administration is the expression, can only be regarded as approximate.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 194&mdash;<q>The Egyptian Book of the Dead represents the
deceased person as standing in the presence of the goddess Maāt , who is distinguished
by the ostrich-feather on her head; she holds the sceptre in one hand and the symbol
of life in the other. The man's heart, which represents his entire moral nature, is
being weighed in the balance in the presence of Osiris, seated upon his throne as judge
of the dead.</q> Rationalism believes in only present and temporal judgment; and this
it regards as but the reaction of natural law: <q>Die Weltgeschichte ist das Weltgericht,&mdash;the
world's history is the world's judgment</q> (Schiller, Resignation). But there is
an inner connection between present, temporal, spiritual judgments, and the final,
outward, complete judgment of God. Nero's murder of his mother was not the only
penalty of his murder of Germanicus.
</p>

<p>
Dorner: <q>With Christ's appearance, faith sees that the beginning of the judgment
and of the end has come. Christians are a prophetic race. Without judgment, Christianity
<pb n='1025'/><anchor id='Pg1025'/>
would involve a sort of dualism: evil and good would be of equal might and
worth. Christianity cannot always remain a historic principle <emph>alongside</emph> of the contrary
principle of evil. It is the only reality.</q> God will show or make known his
righteousness with regard to: (1) the disparity of lots among men; (2) the prosperity
of the wicked; (3) the permission of moral evil in general; (4) the consistency of
atonement with justice. <q>The συντέλεια τοῦ αἰῶνος (<q><hi rend='italic'>end of the world</hi>,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 13:39</hi>) = stripping
hostile powers of their usurped might, revelation of their falsity and impotence,
consigning them to the past. Evil shall be utterly cut off, given over to its own
nothingness, or made a subordinate element.</q>
</p>

<p>
A great statesman said that what he dreaded for his country was not the day of
judgment, but the day of no judgment. <q>Jove strikes the Titans down, Not when they
first begin their mountain-piling, But when another rock would crown their work.</q>
R. W. Emerson: <q>God said: I am tired of kings, I suffer them no more; Up to my ears
the morning brings The outrage of the poor.</q> Royce, The World and the Individual,
2:384 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>&mdash;<q>If God's life is given to free individual souls, then God's life can be given
also to free nations and to a free race of men. There may be an apostasy of a family,
nation, race, and a judgment of each according to their deeds.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Expositor, March, 1898&mdash;<q>It is claimed that we are being judged now, that laws
execute themselves, that the system of the universe is automatic, that there is no need
for future retribution. But all ages have agreed that there is not here and now any
sufficient vindication of the principle of eternal justice. The mills of the gods grind
slowly. Physical immorality is not proportionately punished. Deterioration is not an
adequate penalty. Telling a second lie does not recompense the first. Punishment
includes pain, and here is no pain. That there is not punishment here is due, not to
law, but to grace.</q>
</p>

<p>
Denney, Studies in Theology, 240, 241&mdash;<q>The dualistic conception of an endless suspense,
in which good and evil permanently balance each other and contest with each
other the right to inherit the earth, is virtually atheistic, and the whole Bible is a protest
against it.... It is impossible to overestimate the power of the final judgment, as
a motive, in the primitive church. On almost every page of St. Paul, for instance, we
see that he lives in the presence of it; he lets the awe of it descend into his heart to
keep his conscience quick.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. The object of the final judgment.</head>

<p>
The object of the final judgment is not the ascertainment, but the manifestation,
of character, and the assignment of outward condition corresponding
to it.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) To the omniscient Judge, the condition of all moral creatures is
already and fully known. The last day will be only <q>the <emph>revelation</emph> of
the righteous judgment of God.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
They are inwardly judged when they die, and before they die; they are outwardly
judged at the last day: <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 2:5, 6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>treasurest up for thyself wrath in the day of wrath and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God; who will render to every man according to his works</hi></q>&mdash;see Meyer on this passage;
not <q>against the day of wrath,</q> but <q><hi rend='italic'>in the day of wrath</hi></q>&mdash;wrath existing beforehand,
but breaking out on that day. <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 5:24, 25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Some men's sins are evident, going before unto
judgment; and some men also they follow after. In like manner also there are good works that are evident; and such
as are otherwise cannot be hid</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 14:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>for their works follow with them</hi></q>&mdash;as close companions,
into God's presence and judgment (Ann. Par. Bible).
</p>

<p>
Epitaph: <q>Hic jacet in expectatione diei supremi.... Qualis erat, dies iste indicabit</q>&mdash;<q>Here
lies, in expectation of the last day.... Of what sort he was, that day
will show.</q> Shakespeare, Hamlet, 3:3&mdash;<q>In the corrupted currents of this world
Offence's glided hand may shove by justice. But 'tis not so above. There is no shuffling,
there the action lies In his true nature; and we ourselves compelled, Even to the teeth
and forehead of our faults. To give in evidence</q>; King John, 4:2&mdash;<q>Oh, when the last
account 'twixt heaven and earth Is to be made, then shall this hand and seal [the
warrant for the murder of Prince Arthur] Witness against us to damnation.</q> <q>Not
all your piety nor wit Can lure it [justice] back to cancel half a line, Nor all your tears
wash out one word of it.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='1026'/><anchor id='Pg1026'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) In the nature of man, there are evidences and preparations for this
final disclosure. Among these may be mentioned the law of memory, by
which the soul preserves the records of its acts, both good and evil (Luke
16:25); the law of conscience, by which men involuntarily anticipate
punishment for their own sins (Rom. 2:15, 16; Heb. 10:27); the law of
character, by which every thought and deed makes indelible impress upon
the moral nature (Heb. 3:8, 15).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The law of memory.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Luke 16:25</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Son, remember!</hi></q> See Maclaren, Sermons, 1:109-122&mdash;Memory
(1) will embrace all the events of the past life; (2) will embrace them all at
the same moment; (3) will embrace them continuously and continually. Memory is a
process of self-registry. As every business house keeps a copy of all letters sent or
orders issued, so every man retains in memory the record of his sins. The mind is a
palimpsest; though the original writing has been erased, the ink has penetrated the
whole thickness of the parchment, and God's chemistry is able to revive it. Hudson, Dem.
of Future Life, 212, 213&mdash;<q>Subjective memory is the retention of all ideas, however
superficially they may have been impressed upon the objective mind, and it admits
of no variation in different individuals. Recollection is the power of recalling ideas
to the mind. This varies greatly. Sir William Hamilton calls the former <q>mental
latency.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
The law of conscience.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 2:15, 16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>they show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
conscience bearing witness therewith, and their thoughts one with another accusing or else excusing them; in the day
when God shall judge the secrets of men, according to my gospel, by Jesus Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>a certain fearful
expectation of judgment, and a fierceness of fire which shall devour the adversaries.</hi></q> Goethe said that his
writings, taken together, constituted a great confession. Wordsworth, Excursion,
III:579&mdash;<q>For, like a plague will memory break out. And, in the blank and solitude
of things, Upon his spirit, with a fever's strength, Will conscience prey.</q> A man
who afterwards became a Methodist preacher was converted in Whitefield's time
by a vision of the judgment, in which he saw all men gathered before the throne,
and each one coming up to the book of God's law, tearing open his heart before it <q>as
one would tear open the bosom of his shirt,</q> comparing his heart with the things written
in the book, and, according as they agreed or disagreed with that standard, either
passing triumphant to the company of the blest, or going with howling to the company
of the damned. No word was spoken; the Judge sat silent; the judgment was one of
self-revelation and self-condemnation. See Autobiography of John Nelson (quoted in
the Diary of Mrs. Kitty Trevylyan, 207, by Mrs. E. Charles, the author of The Schönberg-Cotta
Family).
</p>

<p>
The law of character.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 3:8, 15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, Like as in the day of
the trial in the wilderness.... Today, if ye shall hear his voice, Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation.</hi></q> Sin
leaves its marks upon the soul; men become <q><hi rend='italic'>past feeling</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 4:19</hi>). In England, churchmen
claim to tell a dissenter by his walk&mdash;not a bad sign by which to know a man.
God needs only to hold up our characters to show what have been our lives. Sin leaves
its scars upon the soul, as truly as lust and hatred leave their marks upon the body. So
with the manifestation of the good&mdash;<q>the chivalry that does the right, and disregards
The yea and nay of the world.... Expect nor question nor reply At what we figure
as God's judgment-bar</q> (Robert Browning, Ring and Book, 178, 202). Mr. Edison says:
<q>In a few years the world will be just like one big ear; it will be unsafe to speak in a
house till one has examined the walls and the furniture for concealed phonographs.</q>
But the world even now is <q>one big ear</q>, and we ourselves in our characters are writing
the books of the judgment. Brooks, Foundations of Zoölogy, 134, 135&mdash;<q>Every part
of the material universe contains a permanent record of every change that has taken
place therein, and there is also no limit to the power of minds like ours to read and
interpret the record.</q>
</p>

<p>
Draper, Conflict of Science and Religion: <q>If on a cold polished metal, as a new razor,
any object, such as a wafer, be laid, and the metal breathed upon, and when the
moisture has had time to disappear, the wafer be thrown off, though now the most
critical inspection of the polished surface can discern no trace of any form, if we
breathe once more upon it, a spectral image of the wafer comes plainly into view; and
this may be done again and again. Nay, more; if the polished metal be carefully put
aside where nothing can injure its surface, and be kept so for many months, on breathing
upon it again, the shadowy form emerges. A shadow never falls upon a wall without
<pb n='1027'/><anchor id='Pg1027'/>
leaving thereon a permanent trace, a trace which might be made visible by resorting
to proper processes. Upon the walls of our most private apartments, where we
think the eye of intrusion is altogether shut out, and our retirement can never be profaned,
there exist the vestiges of all our acts.</q>
</p>

<p>
Babbage, Ninth Bridgewater Treatise, 113-115&mdash;<q>If we had power to follow and
detect the minutest effects of any disturbance, each particle of existing matter would
furnish a register of all that has happened. The track of every canoe, of every vessel
that has yet disturbed the surface of the ocean, whether impelled by manual force or
elemental power, remains forever registered in the future movement of all succeeding
particles which may occupy its place. The furrow which it left is indeed filled up by
the closing waters, but they draw after them other and larger portions of the surrounding
element, and these again, once moved, communicate motion to others in endless
succession. The air itself is one vast library, in whose pages are forever written all that
man has said or even whispered. There, in their mutable but unerring characters,
mixed with the earliest as well as the latest sighs of mortality, stand forever recorded
vows unredeemed, promises unfulfilled, perpetuating in the united movements of each
particle the testimony of man's changeful will.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Single acts and words, therefore, are to be brought into the judgment
only as indications of the moral condition of the soul. This manifestation
of all hearts will vindicate not only God's past dealings, but his
determination of future destinies.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 12:36</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I say unto you, that every idle word that man shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the
day of judgment</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:2, 8, 9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>there is nothing covered up, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not
be known.... Every one who shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of
God: but he that denieth me in the presence of men shall be denied in the presence of the angels of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 3:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He
that believeth on him is not judged: he that believeth not hath been judged already, because he hath not believed
on the name of the only begotten Son of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For we must all be made manifest</hi> [not: <q>must all
appear,</q> as in A. Vers.] <hi rend='italic'>before the judgment-seat of Christ</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Even the human judge, in passing sentence, commonly endeavors so to set forth the
guilt of the criminal that he shall see his doom to be just. So God will awaken the consciences
of the lost, and lead them to pass judgment on themselves. Each lost soul can
say as Byron's Manfred said to the fiend that tortured his closing hour: <q>I have not
been thy dupe, nor am thy prey, But was my own destroyer.</q> Thus God's final judgment
will be only the culmination of a process of natural selection, by which the unfit
are eliminated, and the fit are caused to survive.
</p>

<p>
O. J. Smith, The Essential Verity of Religion: <q>Belief in the immortality of the soul
and belief in the accountability of the soul are fundamental beliefs in all religion. The
origin of the belief in immortality is found in the fact that justice can be established in
human affairs only upon the theory that the soul of man is immortal, and the belief
that man is accountable for his actions eternally is based upon the conviction that
justice should and will be enforced. The central verity in religion therefore is eternal
justice. The sense of justice makes us men. Religion has no miraculous origin,&mdash;it is
born with the awakening of man's moral sense. Friendship and love are based on reciprocity,
which is justice. <q>Universal justice,</q> says Aristotle, <q>includes all virtues.</q></q>
If by justice here is meant the divine justice, implied in the awakening of man's moral
sense, we can agree with the above. As we have previously intimated, we regard the
belief in immortality as an inference from the intuition of God's existence, and every
new proof that God is just strengthens our conviction of immortality.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. The Judge in the final judgment.</head>

<p>
God, in the person of Jesus Christ, is to be the judge. Though God is
the judge of all (Heb. 12:23), yet this judicial activity is exercised through
Christ, at the last day, as well as in the present state (John 5:22, 27).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 12:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to God the judge of all</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 5:22, 27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For neither doth the Father judge any man, but he hath
given all judgment unto the Son ... and he gave him authority to execute judgment, because he is a son of man.</hi></q>
Stevens, Johannine Theology, 349&mdash;<q>Jesus says that he judges no man (<hi rend='italic'>John 8:15</hi>). He
does not personally judge men. His attitude toward men is solely that of Savior. It is
rather his work, his word, his truth, which pronounces condemnation against them
both here and hereafter. The judgment is that light is come; men's attitude toward
<pb n='1028'/><anchor id='Pg1028'/>
the light involves their judgment; the light judges them, or, they judge themselves....
The Savior does not come to judge but to save them; but, by their rejection of
salvation, they turn the saving message itself into a judgment.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This, for three reasons:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Christ's human nature enables men to understand both the law and
the love of God, and so makes intelligible the grounds on which judgment
is passed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Whoever says that God is too distant and great to be understood may be pointed to
Christ, in whose human life the divine <q>law appears, drawn out in living characters,</q>
and the divine love is manifest, as suffering upon the cross to save men from their sins.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The perfect human nature of Christ, united as it is to the divine,
ensures all that is needful in true judgment, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: that it be both merciful
and just.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 17:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath
given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
As F. W. Robertson has shown in his sermon on <q>The Sympathy of Christ</q> (vol. 1:
sermon vii), it is not sin that most sympathizes with sin. Sin blinds and hardens. Only
the pure can appreciate the needs of the impure, and feel for them.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Human nature, sitting upon the throne of judgment, will afford convincing
proof that Christ has received the reward of his sufferings, and
that humanity has been perfectly redeemed. The saints shall <q>judge the
world</q> only as they are one with Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The lowly Son of man shall sit upon the throne of judgment. And with himself he
will join all believers. <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 19:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye who have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall
sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 22:28-30</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But
ye are they that have continued with me in my temptations; and I appoint unto you a kingdom, even as my Father
appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom; and ye shall sit on thrones judging the
twelve tribes of Israel</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 6:2, 3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>know ye not that the saints shall judge the world?... Know ye not that we
shall judge angels?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 3:21</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that overcometh, I will give to him to sit down with me in my throne, as I also
overcame, and sat down with my Father in his throne.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. The subjects of the final judgment.</head>

<p>
The persons upon whose characters and conduct this judgment shall be
passed are of two great classes:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) All men&mdash;each possessed of body as well as soul,&mdash;the dead having
been raised, and the living having been changed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:51, 52</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We all shall not sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at
the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1
Thess. 4:16, 17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven, with a shout, with the voice of an archangel, and
with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we that are alive, that are left, shall together with
them be caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) All evil angels,&mdash;good angels appearing only as attendants and
ministers of the Judge.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Evil angels: <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 2:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For if God spared not angels when they sinned, but cast them down to hell, and
committed them to pits of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jude 6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And angels that kept not their own
principality, but left their proper habitation, he hath kept in everlasting bonds under darkness unto the judgment of the
great day</hi></q>; Good angels: <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 13:41, 42</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out
of his kingdom all things that cause stumbling, and them that do iniquity, and shall cast them into the furnace of fire:
there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>25:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and
all the angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all the nations.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='1029'/><anchor id='Pg1029'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>5. The grounds of the final judgment.</head>

<p>
These will be two in number:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The law of God,&mdash;as made known in conscience and in Scripture.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 12:48</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my sayings, hath one that judgeth him: the word that I spake,
the same shall judge him in the last day</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 2:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For as many as have sinned without the law shall also
perish without the law: and as many as have sinned under the law shall be judged by the law.</hi></q> On the self-registry
and disclosure of sin, see F. A. Noble, Our Redemption, 59-76. Dr. Noble
quotes Daniel Webster in the Knapp case at Salem: <q>There is no refuge from confession
but suicide, and suicide is confession.</q> Thomas Carlyle said to Lord Houghton:
<q>Richard Milnes! in the day of judgment, when the Lord asks you why you did not get
that pension for Alfred Tennyson, it will not do to lay the blame on your constituents,&mdash;it
is you that will be damned.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The grace of Christ (Rev. 20:12),&mdash;those whose names are found
<q>written in the book of life</q> being approved, simply because of their union
with Christ and participation in his righteousness. Their good works shall
be brought into judgment only as proofs of this relation to the Redeemer.
Those not found <q>written in the book of life</q> will be judged by the law of
God, as God has made it known to each individual.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne; and books were opened: and
another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of the things which were written in
the books, according to their works.</hi></q> The <q><hi rend='italic'>book of life</hi></q> = the book of justification, in which are
written the names of those who are united to Christ by faith; as the <q>book of death</q>
would = the book of condemnation, in which are written the names of those who stand
in their sins, as unrepentant and unforgiven transgressors of God's law.
</p>

<p>
Ferries, in Hastings' Bible Dictionary, 2:821&mdash;<q>The judgment, in one aspect or stage
of it, is a present act. For judgment Christ is come into this world (<hi rend='italic'>John 9:39</hi>). There
is an actual separation of men in progress here and now.... This judgment which is
in progress now, is destined to be perfected.... In the last assize, Christ will be the
Judge as before.... It may be said that men will hereafter judge themselves. Those
who are unlike Christ will find themselves as such to be separate from him. The two
classes of people are parted because they have acquired distinct natures like the sheep
and the goat.... The character of each person is a <q><emph>book</emph></q> or record, preserving, in
moral and spiritual effects, all that he has been and done and loved, and in the judgment
these books will be <q><emph>opened</emph>,</q> or each man's character will be manifested as the
light of Christ's character falls upon it.... The people of Christ themselves receive
different rewards, according as their life has been.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. H. E. Robins, in his Restatement, holds that only under the grace-system can the
deeds done in the body be the ground of judgment. These deeds will be repentance
and faith, not words of external morality. They will be fruits of the Spirit, such as
spring from the broken and contrite heart. Christ, as head of the mediatorial kingdom,
will fitly be the Judge. So Judgment will be an unmixed blessing to the righteous.
To them the words <q><hi rend='italic'>prepare to meet thy God</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Amos 4:12</hi>) should have no terror; for to meet
God is to meet their deliverance and their reward. <q>Teach me to live that I may dread
The grave as little as my bed: Teach me to die, that so I may Rise glorious at the
judgment day.</q> On the whole subject, see Hodge, Outlines of Theology, 456, 457;
Martensen, Christian Dogmatics, 465, 466; Neander, Planting and Training, 524-526;
Jonathan Edwards, Works, 2:499, 500; 4:202-225; Fox, in Lutheran Rev., 1887:206-226.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VI. The Final States of the Righteous and of the Wicked.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Of the righteous.</head>

<p>
The final state of the righteous is described as eternal life (Mat. 25:46),
glory (2 Cor. 4:17), rest (Heb. 4:9), knowledge (1 Cor. 13:8-10), holiness
(Rev. 21:27), service (Rev. 22:3), worship (Rev. 19:1), society
(Heb. 12:23), communion with God (Rev. 21:3).
</p>

<pb n='1030'/><anchor id='Pg1030'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And these shall go away into eternal punishment: but the righteous into eternal life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 4:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For
our light affliction, which is for the moment, worketh for us more and more exceedingly an eternal weight of
glory</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 4:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>There remaineth therefore a sabbath rest for the people of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 13:8-10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Love never
faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall be done away; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether
there be knowledge, it shall be done away. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part: but when that which is
perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and there shall in no wise enter into it anything
unclean, or he that maketh an abomination and a lie: but only they that are written in the Lamb's book of life</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>22:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and his servants shall serve him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>19:1, 2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>After these things I heard as it were a great voice of a great
multitude in heaven, saying, Hallelujah; Salvation, and glory, and power, belong to our God; for true and righteous
are his judgments</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 12:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to the general assembly and church of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I heard a great voice out of the throne saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall
dwell with them, and they shall be his peoples, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Is. 35:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The mirage shall become a pool</hi></q> = aspiration shall become reality; <hi rend='italic'>Hos. 2:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I will
give her ... the valley of Achor</hi> [that is, <hi rend='italic'>Troubling</hi>] <hi rend='italic'>for a door of hope.</hi></q> Victor Hugo: <q>If you
persuade Lazarus that there is no Abraham's bosom awaiting him, he will not lie at
Dives' door, to be fed with his crumbs,&mdash;he will make his way into the house and fling
Dives out of the window.</q> It was the preaching of the Methodists that saved England
from the general crash of the French Revolution. It brought the common people to
look for the redress of the inequalities and injustices of this life in a future life&mdash;a
world of less friction than this (S. S. Times). In the Alps one has no idea of the upper
valleys until he enters them. He may long to ascend, but only actual ascending can
show him their beauty. And then, <q>beyond the Alps lies Italy,</q> and the revelation of
heaven will be like the outburst of the sunny landscape after going through the darkness
of the St. Gothard tunnel.
</p>

<p>
Robert Hall, who for years had suffered acute bodily pain, said to Wilberforce: <q>My
chief conception of heaven is <emph>rest</emph>.</q> <q>Mine,</q> replied Wilberforce, <q>is <emph>love</emph>&mdash;love to God
and to every bright inhabitant of that glorious place.</q> Wilberforce enjoyed society.
Heaven is not all rest. On the door is inscribed: <q>No admission except on business.</q>
<q><hi rend='italic'>His servants shall serve him</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:3</hi>). Butler, Things Old and New, 143&mdash;<q>We know not;
but if life be there The outcome and the crown of this: What else can make their perfect
bliss Than in their Master's work to share? Resting, but not in slumberous ease,
Working, but not in wild unrest, Still ever blessing, ever blest, They see us as the
Father sees.</q> Tennyson, Crossing the Bar: <q>Sunset and evening star, And one clear
call for me; And may there be no moaning of the bar When I put out to sea! But
such a tide as moving seems asleep, Too full for sound and foam, When that which
drew from out the boundless deep Turns again home. Twilight and evening bell, And
after that the dark; And may there be no sadness of farewell, When I embark. For
though from out our bourne of time and place The flood may bear me far, I hope to see
my Pilot face to face, When I have crossed the bar.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 6:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven</hi></q> = there are no permanent investments
except in heaven. A man at death is worth only what he has sent on before him. Christ
prepares a place for us (<hi rend='italic'>John 14:3</hi>) by gathering our friends to himself. Louise Chandler
Moulton: <q>Some day or other I shall surely come Where true hearts wait for me;
Then let me learn the language of that home, While here on earth I be; Lest my poor
lips for want of words be dumb In that high company.</q> Bronson Alcott: <q>Heaven
will be to me a place where I can get a little conversation.</q> Some of his friends thought
it would be a place where he could hear himself talk. A pious Scotchman, when asked
whether he ever expected to reach heaven, replied: <q>Why, mon, I live there noo!</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Summing up all these, we may say that it is the fulness and perfection of
holy life, in communion with God and with sanctified spirits. Although
there will be degrees of blessedness and honor, proportioned to the capacity
and fidelity of each soul (Luke 19:17, 19; 1 Cor. 3:14, 15), each will
receive as great a measure of reward as it can contain (1 Cor. 2:9), and
this final state, once entered upon, will be unchanging in kind and endless
in duration (Rev. 3:12; 22:15).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 19:17, 19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Well done, thou good servant: because thou wast found faithful in a very little, have thou authority
over ten cities.... Be thou also over five cities</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 3:14, 15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>If any man's work shall abide which he
built thereon, he shall receive a reward. If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be
saved; yet so as through fire</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Things which eye saw not, and ear heard not, And which entered not into the
heart of man, Whatsoever things God prepared for them that love him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 3:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that overcometh, I will make
<pb n='1031'/><anchor id='Pg1031'/>
him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go out thence no more</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>22:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Without are the dogs, and the
sorcerers, and the fornicators, and the murderers, and the idolaters, and every one that loveth and maketh a lie.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
In the parable of the laborers (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 20:1-16</hi>), each receives a penny. Rewards in heaven
will be equal, in the sense that each saved soul will be filled with good. But rewards
will vary, in the sense that the capacity of one will be greater than that of another; and
this capacity will be in part the result of our improvement of God's gifts in the present
life. The relative value of the penny may in this way vary from a single unit to a
number indefinitely great, according to the work and spirit of the recipient. The
penny is good only for what it will buy. For the eleventh hour man, who has done but
little work, it will not buy so sweet rest as it buys for him who has <q><hi rend='italic'>borne the burden of the
day and the scorching heat</hi>.</q> It will not buy appetite, nor will it buy joy of conscience.
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson: <q>Heaven is not to be compared to a grasshopper on a shingle
floating down stream. Heaven is a place where men are taken up, as they leave this
world, and are carried forward. No sinners will be there, though there may be incompleteness
of character. There is no intimation in Scripture of that sudden transformation
in the hour of dissolution which is often supposed.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 84:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>They go from strength to
strength; Every one of them appeareth before God in Zion</hi></q>&mdash;it is not possible that progress should
cease with our entrance into heaven; rather is it true that uninterrupted progress will
then begin. <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 13:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>now we see in a mirror, darkly; but then face to face.</hi></q> There, progress is
not <emph>towards</emph>, but <emph>within</emph>, the sphere of the infinite. In this world we are like men living
in a cave, and priding themselves on the rushlights with which they explore it, unwilling
to believe that there is a region of sunlight where rushlights are needless.
</p>

<p>
Heaven will involve deliverance from defective physical organization and surroundings,
as well as from the remains of evil in our hearts. Rest, in heaven, will be consistent
with service, an activity without weariness, a service which is perfect freedom.
We shall be perfect when we enter heaven, in the sense of being free from sin; but we
shall grow to greater perfection thereafter, in the sense of a larger and completer
being. The fruit tree shows perfection at each stage of its growth&mdash;the perfect bud,
the perfect blossom, and finally the perfect fruit; yet the bud and the blossom are preparatory
and prophetic; neither one is a finality. So <q><hi rend='italic'>when that which is perfect is come, that
which is in part shall be done away</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 13:10</hi>). A broadshouldered convert at the Rescue
Mission said: <q>I'm the happiest man in the room to-night. I couldn't be any happier
unless I were larger.</q> A little pail can be as full of water as is a big tub, but the tub
will hold much more than the pail. To be <q><hi rend='italic'>filled unto all the fulness of God</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 3:19</hi>) will mean
much more in heaven than it means here, because we shall then <q><hi rend='italic'>be strong to apprehend with
all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth, and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge</hi>.</q>
In the book of Revelation, John seems to have mistaken an angel for the Lord
himself, and to have fallen down to worship (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 22:8</hi>). The time may come in eternity
when we shall be equal to what we now conceive God to be (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 2:9</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Plato's Republic and More's Utopia are only earthly adumbrations of St. John's City
of God. The representation of heaven as a city seems intended to suggest security
from every foe, provision for every want, intensity of life, variety of occupation, and
closeness of relation to others; or, as Hastings' Bible Dictionary, 1:446, puts it:
<q>Safety, Security, Service.</q> Here, the greatest degradation and sin are found in the
great cities. There, the life of the city will help holiness, as the life of the city here
helps wickedness. Brotherly love in the next world implies knowing those we love,
and loving those we know. We certainly shall not know less there than here. If we
know our friends here, we shall know them there. And, as love to Christ here draws
us nearer to each other, so there we shall love friends, not less but more, because of
our greater nearness to Christ.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Zech. 8:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.</hi></q> Newman
Smyth, Through Science to Faith, 125&mdash;<q>As of the higher animals, so even more of men
and women it may be true, that those who play best may succeed best and thrive
best.</q> Horace Bushnell, in his essay, Work and Play, holds that ideal work is work
performed so heartily and joyfully, and with such a surplus of energy, that it becomes
play. This is the activity of heaven: <hi rend='italic'>John 10:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I came that they may have life, and may have it
abundantly.</hi></q> We enter into the life of God: <hi rend='italic'>John 5:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>My Father worketh even until now, and I
work.</hi></q> A nurse who had been ill for sixteen years, said: <q>If I were well, I would be at
the small-pox hospital. I'm not going to heaven to do nothing.</q> Savage, Life after
Death, 129, 292&mdash;<q>In Dante's universe, the only reason for any one's wanting to get to
heaven is for the sake of getting out of the other place. There is nothing in heaven for
him to do, nothing human for him to engage in.... A good deacon in his depression
thought he was going to hell; but when asked what he would do there, he replied that
he would try to start a prayer meeting.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='1032'/><anchor id='Pg1032'/>

<p>
With regard to heaven, two questions present themselves, namely:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(a) Is heaven a place, as well as a state?</head>

<p>
We answer that this is probable, for the reason that the presence of
Christ's human body is essential to heaven, and that this body must be
confined to place. Since deity and humanity are indissolubly united in
Christ's single person, we cannot regard Christ's human soul as limited to
place without vacating his person of its divinity. But we cannot conceive
of his human body as thus omnipresent. As the new bodies of the saints
are confined to place, so, it would seem, must be the body of their Lord.
But, though heaven be the place where Christ manifests his glory through
the human body which he assumed in the incarnation, our ruling conception
of heaven must be something higher even than this, namely, that of a
state of holy communion with God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 14:2, 3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>In my Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you; for I go to prepare
a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I come again, and will receive you unto myself; that
where I am, there ye may be also</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 12:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>follow after peace with all men, and the sanctification without
which no man shall see the Lord.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Although heaven is probably a place, we are by no means to allow this conception to
become the preponderant one in our minds. Milton: <q>The mind is its own place, and
in itself Can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven.</q> As he goes through the gates of
death, every Christian can say, as Cæsar said when he crossed the Rubicon: <q>Omnia
mea mecum porto.</q> The hymn <q>O sing to me of heaven, when I am called to die</q> is
not true to Christian experience. In that hour the soul sings, not of heaven, but of
Jesus and his cross. As houses on river-flats, accessible in time of flood by boats, keep
safe only goods in the upper story, so only the treasure laid up above escapes the
destroying floods of the last day. Dorner: <q>The soul will possess true freedom, in that
it can no more become unfree; and that through the indestructible love-energy
springing from union with God.</q>
</p>

<p>
Milton: <q>What if earth be But the shadow of heaven, and things therein Each to the
other like, more than on earth is thought?</q> Omar Khayyám, Rubáiyát, stanzas 66, 67&mdash;<q>I
sent my soul through the Invisible, Some letter of that After-life to spell: And by
and by my soul returned to me, And answered <q>I myself am Heaven and Hell</q> ...
Heaven but the vision of fulfilled desire, And Hell the shadow of a soul on fire.</q> In
other words, not the kind of place, but the kind of people in it, makes Heaven or Hell.
Crane, Religion of To-morrow, 341&mdash;<q>The earth is but a breeding-ground from which
God intends to populate the whole universe. After death, the soul goes to that place
which God has prepared as its home. In the resurrection they <q><hi rend='italic'>neither marry nor are given in
marriage</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 22:30</hi>) = ours is the only generative planet. There is no reproduction
hereafter. To incorporate himself into the race, the Father must come to the reproductive
planet.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dean Stanley: <q><hi rend='italic'>Till death us part!</hi> So speaks the heart When each repeats to each
the words of doom; Through blessing and through curse, For better and for worse, We
will be one till that dread hour shall come. Life, with its myriad grasp, Our yearning
souls shall clasp, By ceaseless love and still expectant wonder, In bonds that shall
endure, Indissolubly sure, Till God in death shall part our paths asunder. <hi rend='italic'>Till death us
join!</hi> O voice yet more divine, That to the broken heart breathes hope sublime;
Through lonely hours and shattered powers, We still are one despite of change or time.
Death, with his healing hand, Shall once more knit the band, Which needs but that
one link which none may sever; Till through the only Good, Heard, felt and understood,
Our life in God shall make us one forever.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>(b) Is this earth to be the heaven of the saints?</head>

<p>
We answer:
</p>

<p>
First,&mdash;that the earth is to be purified by fire, and perhaps prepared to
be the abode of the saints,&mdash;although this last is not rendered certain by
the Scriptures.
</p>

<pb n='1033'/><anchor id='Pg1033'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 8:19-23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For the earnest expectation of the creation waiteth for the revealing of the sons of God. For the
creation was subjected to vanity, not of its own will, but by reason of him who subjected it, in hope that the creation itself
also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God. For we know
that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. And not only so, but ourselves also, who
have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for our adoption, to wit, the
redemption of our body</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 3:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>looking for and earnestly desiring the coming of the day of God, by reason
of which the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. But, according to
his promise, we look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I saw a
new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth are passed away; and the sea is no more.</hi></q>
Dorner: <q>Without loss of substantiality, matter will have exchanged its darkness,
hardness, heaviness, inertia, and impenetrableness, for clearness, radiance, elasticity,
and transparency. A new stadium will begin&mdash;God's advance to new creations, with
the coöperation of perfected mankind.</q>
</p>

<p>
Is the earth a molten mass, with a thin solid crust? Lord Kelvin says no,&mdash;it is
more rigid and solid than steel. The interior may be intensely hot, yet pressure may
render it solid to the very centre. The wrinkling of the surface may be due to contraction,
or <q>solid flow,</q> like the wrinkling in the skin of a baked apple that has
cooled. See article on The Interior of the Earth, by G. F. Becker, in N. American Rev.,
April, 1893. Edward S. Holden, Director of the Lick Observatory, in The Forum, Oct.
1893:211-220, tells us that <q>the star Nova Aurigæ, which doubtless resembled our sun,
within two days increased in brilliancy sixteen fold. Three months after its discovery
it had become invisible. After four months again it reappeared and was comparatively
bright. But it was no longer a star but a nebula. In other words it had developed
changes of light and heat which, if repeated in the case of our own sun, would mean a
quick end of the human race, and the utter annihilation of every vestige of animal
and other life upon this earth.... This catastrophe occured in December, 1891, or
was announced to us by light which reached us then. But this light must have left
the star twenty, perhaps fifty, years earlier.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Secondly,&mdash;that this fitting-up of the earth for man's abode, even if it
were declared in Scripture, would not render it certain that the saints are
to be confined to these narrow limits (John 14:2). It seems rather to be
intimated that the effect of Christ's work will be to bring the redeemed into
union and intercourse with other orders of intelligence, from communion
with whom they are now shut out by sin (Eph. 1:20; Col. 1:20).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John 14:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>In my Father's house are many mansions</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>unto a dispensation of the fulness of the times,
to sum up all things in Christ, the things in the heavens, and the things upon the earth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Col. 1:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>through him to
reconcile all things unto himself, having made peace through the blood of his cross; through him, I say, whether things
upon the earth, or things in the heavens.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
See Dr. A. C. Kendrick, in Bap. Quarterly, Jan. 1870. Dr. Kendrick thinks we need
local associations. Earth may be our home, yet from this home we may set out on
excursions through the universe, after a time returning again to our earthly abodes.
So Chalmers, interpreting literally <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 3</hi>. We certainly are in a prison here, and look
out through the bars, as the Prisoner of Chillon looked over the lake to the green isle
and the singing birds. Why are we shut out from intercourse with other worlds and
other orders of intelligence? Apparently it is the effect of sin. We are in an abnormal
state of durance and probation. Earth is out of harmony with God. The great harp
of the universe has one of its strings out of tune, and that one discordant string makes
a jar through the whole. All things in heaven and earth shall be reconciled when this
one jarring string is keyed right and set in tune by the hand of love and mercy. See
Leitch, God's Glory in the Heavens, 327-330.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Of the wicked.</head>

<p>
The final state of the wicked is described under the figures of eternal fire
(Mat. 25:41); the pit of the abyss (Rev. 9:2, 11); outer darkness (Mat.
8:12); torment (Rev. 14:10, 11); eternal punishment (Mat. 25:46);
wrath of God (Rom. 2:5); second death (Rev. 21:8); eternal destruction
from the face of the Lord (2 Thess. 1:9); eternal sin (Mark 3:29).
</p>

<pb n='1034'/><anchor id='Pg1034'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:41</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Depart from me, ye cursed, into the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev.
9:2, 11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And he opened the pit of the abyss; and there went up a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace....
They have over them as king the angel of the abyss: his name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in the Greek tongue he
hath the name Apollyon</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 8:12</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>but the sons of the kingdom shall be cast forth into the outer darkness: there
shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 14:10, 11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he also shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
which is prepared unmixed in the cup of his anger; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of
the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: and the smoke of their torment goeth up for ever and ever</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat.
25:46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And these shall go away into eternal punishment.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 2:5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up for thyself wrath in the day of wrath and revelation
of the righteous judgment of God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But for the fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable, and murderers,
and fornicators, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, their part shall be in the lake that burneth with fire
and brimstone; which is the second death</hi></q>: <hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 1:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>who shall suffer punishment, even eternal destruction from
the face of the Lord and from the glory of his might</hi></q>&mdash;here ἀπό, from, = not separation, but <q>proceeding
from,</q> and indicates that the everlasting presence of Christ, once realized,
ensures everlasting destruction; <hi rend='italic'>Mark 3:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit hath
never forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin</hi></q>&mdash;a text which implies that (1) some will never
cease to sin; (2) this eternal sinning will involve eternal misery; (3) this eternal misery,
as the appointed vindication of the law, will be eternal punishment. As Uzziah, when
smitten with leprosy, did not need to be thrust out of the temple, but <q><hi rend='italic'>himself hasted also
to go out</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>2 Chron. 26:20</hi>), so Judas is said to go <q><hi rend='italic'>to his own place</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 1:25</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>4:23</hi>&mdash;where
Peter and John, <q><hi rend='italic'>being let go, they came to their own company</hi></q>). <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>John 8:35</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the bondservant abideth
not in the house forever</hi></q> = whatever be his outward connection with God, it can be only for
a time; <hi rend='italic'>15:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Every branch in me that beareth not fruit, he taketh it away</hi></q>&mdash;at death; the history of
Abraham showed that one might have outward connection with God that was only
temporary: Ishmael was cast out; the promise belonged only to Isaac.
</p>

<p>
Wrightnour: <q>Gehenna was the place into which all the offal of the city of Jerusalem
was swept. So hell is the penitentiary of the moral universe. The profligate is
not happy in the prayer meeting, but in the saloon; the swine is not at home in the
parlor, but in the sty. Hell is the sinner's own place; he had rather be there than in
heaven; he will not come to the house of God, the nearest thing to heaven; why should
we expect him to enter heaven itself?</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Summing up all, we may say that it is the loss of all good, whether
physical or spiritual, and the misery of an evil conscience banished from
God and from the society of the holy, and dwelling under God's positive
curse forever. Here we are to remember, as in the case of the final state of
the righteous, that the decisive and controlling element is not the outward,
but the inward. If hell be a place, it is only that the outward may correspond
to the inward. If there be outward torments, it is only because these
will be fit, though subordinate, accompaniments of the inward state of the
soul.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Every living creature will have an environment suited to its character&mdash;<q>its own
place.</q> <q>I know of the future judgment, How dreadful so e'er it be, That to sit alone
with my conscience Will be judgment enough for me.</q> Calvin: <q>The wicked have the
seeds of hell in their own hearts.</q> Chrysostom, commenting on the words <q>Depart, ye
cursed,</q> says: <q>Their own works brought the punishment on them; the fire was not
prepared for them, but for Satan; yet, since they cast themselves into it, <q>Impute it to
yourselves,</q> he says, <q>that you are there.</q></q> Milton, Par. Lost, 4:75&mdash;Satan: <q>Which
way I fly is hell; myself am hell.</q> Byron: <q>There is no power in holy men, Nor charm
in prayer, nor purifying form Of penitence, nor outward look, nor fast, Nor agony, nor,
greater than all these, The innate torture of that deep despair Would make a hell of
heaven, can exorcise From out the unbounded spirit the quick sense Of its own sins.</q>
</p>

<p>
Phelps, English Style, 228, speaks of <q>a law of the divine government, by which the
body symbolizes, in its experience, the moral condition of its spiritual inhabitant. The
drift of sin is to physical suffering. Moral depravity tends always to a corrupt and
tortured body. Certain diseases are the product of certain crimes. The whole catalogue
of human pains, from a toothache to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>angina pectoris</foreign>, is but a witness to a
state of sin expressed by an experience of suffering. Carry this law into the experience
of eternal sin. The bodies of the wicked live again as well as those of the righteous.
You have therefore a spiritual body, inhabited and used, and therefore tortured, by a
<pb n='1035'/><anchor id='Pg1035'/>
guilty soul,&mdash;a body, perfected in its sensibilities, inclosing and expressing a soul
matured in its depravity.</q> Augustine, Confessions, 25&mdash;<q>Each man's sin is the instrument
of his punishment, and his iniquity is turned into his torment.</q> Lord Bacon:
<q>Being, without well-being, is a curse, and the greater the being, the greater the curse.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In our treatment of the subject of eternal punishment we must remember
that false doctrine is often a reaction from the unscriptural and repulsive
over-statements of Christian apologists. We freely concede: 1. that future
punishment does not necessarily consist of physical torments,&mdash;it may be
wholly internal and spiritual; 2. that the pain and suffering of the future
are not necessarily due to positive inflictions of God,&mdash;they may result
entirely from the soul's sense of loss, and from the accusations of conscience;
and 3. that eternal punishment does not necessarily involve endless
successions of suffering,&mdash;as God's eternity is not mere endlessness, so
we may not be forever subject to the law of time.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
An over-literal interpretation of the Scripture symbols has had much to do with
such utterances as that of Savage, Life after Death, 101&mdash;<q>If the doctrine of eternal
punishment was clearly and unmistakably taught in every leaf of the Bible, and on
every leaf of all the Bibles of all the world, I could not believe a word of it. I should
appeal from these misconceptions of even the seers and the great men to the infinite
and eternal Good, who only is God, and who only on such terms could be worshiped.</q>
</p>

<p>
The figurative language of Scripture is a miniature representation of what cannot be
fully described in words. The symbol is a symbol; yet it is less, not greater, than the
thing symbolized. It is sometimes fancied that Jonathan Edwards, when, in his sermon
on <q>Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God,</q> he represented the sinner as a worm shriveling
in the eternal fire, supposed that hell consists mainly of such physical torments.
But this is a misinterpretation of Edwards. As he did not fancy heaven essentially to
consist in streets of gold or pearly gates, but rather in holiness and communion with
Christ, of which these are the symbols, so he did not regard hell as consisting in fire
and brimstone, but rather in the unholiness and separation from God of a guilty and
accusing conscience, of which the fire and brimstone are symbols. He used the material
imagery, because he thought that this best answered to the methods of Scripture.
He probably went beyond the simplicity of the Scripture statements, and did not sufficiently
explain the spiritual meaning of the symbols he used; but we are persuaded
that he neither understood them literally himself, nor meant them to be so understood
by others.
</p>

<p>
Sin is self-isolating, unsocial, selfish. By virtue of natural laws the sinner reaps as
he has sown, and sooner or later is repaid by desertion or contempt. Then the selfishness
of one sinner is punished by the selfishness of another, the ambition of one by the
ambition of another, the cruelty of one by the cruelty of another. The misery of the
wicked hereafter will doubtless be due in part to the spirit of their companions. They
dislike the good, whose presence and example is a continual reproof and reminder of
the height from which they have fallen, and they shut themselves out of their company.
The judgment will bring about a complete cessation of intercourse between the good
and the bad. Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 1:239&mdash;<q>Beings whose relations to God
are diametrically opposite, and persistently so, differ so greatly from each other that
other ties of relationship became as nothing in comparison.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In order, however, to meet opposing views, and to forestall the common
objections, we proceed to state the doctrine of future punishment in greater
detail:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. The future punishment of the wicked is not annihilation.</head>

<p>
In our
discussion of Physical Death, we have shown that, by virtue of its original
creation in the image of God, the human soul is naturally immortal; that
neither for the righteous nor the wicked is death a cessation of being; that
on the contrary, the wicked enter at death upon a state of conscious suffering
which the resurrection and the judgment only augment and render
<pb n='1036'/><anchor id='Pg1036'/>
permanent. It is plain, moreover, that if annihilation took place at death,
there could be no degrees in future punishment,&mdash;a conclusion itself at
variance with express statements of Scripture.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The old annihilationism is represented by Hudson, Debt and Grace, and Christ our
Life; also by Dobney, Future Punishment. It maintains that κόλασις, <q><hi rend='italic'>punishment</hi></q> (in
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>eternal punishment</hi></q>), means etymologically an everlasting <q>cutting-off.</q> But
we reply that the word had to a great degree lost its etymological significance, as is
evident from the only other passage where it occurs in the New Testament, namely,
<hi rend='italic'>1 John 4:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>fear hath punishment</hi></q> (A. V.: <q>fear hath torment</q>). For full answer to the
old statements of the annihilation-theory, see under Physical Death, pages 991-998.
</p>

<p>
That there are degrees of punishment in God's administration is evident from <hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:47,
48</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And that servant, who knew his Lord's will, and made not ready, nor did according to his will, shall be
beaten with many stripes; but he that knew not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rom.
2:5, 6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up for thyself wrath in the day of wrath and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God; who will render to every man according to his works</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 5:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For we must all
be made manifest before the judgment-seat of Christ; that each one may receive the things done in the body, according to
what he hath done, whether it be good or bad</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>11:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whose end shall be according to their works</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 4:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Alexander
the coppersmith did me much evil: the Lord will render to him according to his works</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 2:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I
will give unto each one of you according to your works</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>18:5, 6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>her sins have reached even unto heaven, and God
hath remembered her iniquities. Render unto her even as she rendered, and double unto her the double according to her
works: in the cup which she mingled, mingle unto her double.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
A French Christian replied to the argument of his deistical friend: <q>Probably you
are right; probably you are not immortal; but I am.</q> This was the doctrine of conditional
immortality, the doctrine that only the good survive. We grant that the measure
of our faith in immortality is the measure of our <emph>fitness</emph> for its blessings; but it is not
the measure of our <emph>possession</emph> of immortality. We are immortal beings, whether we
believe it or not. The acorn is potentially an oak, but it may never come to its full
development. There is a saltless salt, which, though it does not cease to exist, is cast
out and trodden under foot of men. Denney, Studies in Theology, 256&mdash;<q>Conditional
immortality denies that man can exist after death without being united to Christ by
faith. But the immortality of man cannot be something accidental, something
appended to his nature, after he believes in Christ. It must be something, at the very
lowest, for which his nature is constituted, even if apart from Christ it can never
realize itself as it ought.</q>
</p>

<p>
Broadus, Com. on <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:46</hi> (page 514)&mdash;<q>He who caused to exist could keep in
existence. <hi rend='italic'>Mark 9:49</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Every one shall be salted with fire</hi></q>&mdash;has probably this meaning. Fire is
usually destructive; but this unquenchable fire will act like salt, preserving instead
of destroying. So Keble, Christian Year, 5th Sunday in Lent, says of the Jews in their
present condition: <q>Salted with fire, they seem to show How spirits lost in endless
woe May undecaying live. Oh, sickening thought! Yet hold it fast Long as this glittering
world shall last, Or sin at heart survive.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
There are two forms of the annihilation theory which are more plausible,
and which in recent times find a larger number of advocates, namely:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That the powers of the wicked are gradually weakened, as the
natural result of sin, so that they finally cease to be.&mdash;We reply, first, that
moral evil does not, in this present life, seem to be incompatible with a
constant growth of the intellectual powers, at least in certain directions, and
we have no reason to believe the fact to be different in the world to come;
secondly, that if this theory were true, the greater the sin, the speedier
would be the relief from punishment.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This form of the annihilation theory is suggested by Bushnell, in his Forgiveness and
Law, 146, 147, and by Martineau, Study, 2:107-8. Dorner also, in his Eschatology, seems
to favor it as one of the possible methods of future punishment. He says: <q>To the
ethical also pertains ontological significance. The 'second death' may be the dissolving
of the soul itself into nothing. Estrangement from God, the source of life, ends in
extinction of life. The orthodox talk about demented beings, raging in impotent fury,
amounts to the same&mdash;annihilation of their human character. Evil is never the substance
of the soul,&mdash;this remains metaphysically good.</q> It is argued that even for
<pb n='1037'/><anchor id='Pg1037'/>
saved sinners there is a loss. The prodigal regained his father's favor, but he could
not regain his lost patrimony. We cannot get back the lost time, nor the lost growth.
Much more, then, in the case of the wicked, will there be perpetual loss. Draper: <q>At
every return to the sun, comets lose a portion of their size and brightness, stretching
out until the nucleus loses control, the mass breaks up, and the greater portion navigates
the sky, in the shape of disconnected meteorites.</q>
</p>

<p>
To this argument it is often replied that certain minds grow in their powers, at least
in certain directions, in spite of their sin. Napoleon's military genius, during all his
early years, grew with experience. Sloane, in his Life of Napoleon, however, seems to
show that the Emperor lost his grip as he went on. Success unbalanced his judgment;
he gave way to physical indulgence; his body was not equal to the strain he put upon
it; at Waterloo he lost precious moments of opportunity by vacillation and inability to
keep awake. There was physical, mental, and moral deterioration. But may this not be
the result of the soul's connection with a body? Satan's cunning and daring seem to be
on the increase from the first mention of him in Scripture to its end. See Princeton
Review, 1882:673-694. Will not this very cunning and daring, however, work its own
ruin, and lead Satan to his final and complete destruction? Does not sin blunt the
intellect, unsettle one's sober standards of decision, lead one to prefer a trifling present
triumph or pleasure to a permanent good?
</p>

<p>
Gladden, What is Left? 104, 105&mdash;<q>Evil is benumbing and deadening. Selfishness
weakens a man's mental grasp, and narrows his range of vision. The schemer becomes
less astute as he grows older; he is morally sure, before he dies, to make some stupendous
blunder which even a tyro would have avoided.... The devil, who has sinned
longest, must be the greatest fool in the universe, and we need not be at all afraid of
him.</q> To the view that this weakening of powers leads to absolute extinction of being,
we oppose the consideration that its award of retribution is glaringly unjust in making
the greatest sinner the least sufferer; since to him relief, in the way of annihilation,
comes the soonest.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That there is for the wicked, certainly after death, and possibly
between death and the judgment, a positive punishment proportioned to
their deeds, but that this punishment issues in, or is followed by, annihilation.&mdash;We
reply first, that upon this view, as upon any theory of annihilation,
future punishment is a matter of grace as well as of justice&mdash;a notion
for which Scripture affords no warrant; secondly, that Scripture not only
gives no hint of the cessation of this punishment, but declares in the
strongest terms its endlessness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The second form of the annihilation theory seems to have been held by Justin Martyr
(Trypho, Edinb. transl.)&mdash;<q>Some, who have appeared worthy of God, never die; but
others are punished so long as God wills them to exist and be punished.</q> The soul
exists because God wills, and no longer than he wills. <q>Whenever it is necessary that
the soul should cease to exist, the spirit of life is removed from it, and there is no more
soul, but it goes back to the place from which it was taken.</q>
</p>

<p>
Schaff, Hist. Christ. Church, 2:608, 609&mdash;<q>Justin Martyr teaches that the wicked or
hopelessly impenitent will be raised at the judgment to receive an eternal punishment.
He speaks of it in twelve passages: <q>We believe that all who live wickedly and do not
repent will be punished in eternal fire.</q> Such language is inconsistent with the annihilation
theory for which Justin Martyr has been claimed. He does indeed reject the
idea of the independent immortality of the soul, and hints at the <emph>possible</emph> final destruction
of the wicked; but he puts that possibility countless ages beyond the final
judgment, so that it loses all practical significance.</q>
</p>

<p>
A modern advocate of this view is White, in his Life in Christ. He favors a conditional
immortality, belonging only to those who are joined to Christ by faith; but he
makes a retributive punishment and pain fall upon the godless, before their annihilation.
The roots of this view lie in a false conception of holiness as a form or manifestation
of benevolence, and of punishment as deterrent and preventive instead of
vindicative of righteousness. To the minds of its advocates, extinction of being is a
comparative blessing; and they, for this reason, prefer it to the common view. See
Whiton, Is Eternal Punishment Endless?
</p>

<pb n='1038'/><anchor id='Pg1038'/>

<p>
A view similar to that which we are opposing is found in Henry Drummond, Natural
Law in the Spiritual World. Evil is punished by its own increase. Drummond, however,
leaves no room for future life or for future judgment in the case of the unregenerate.
See reviews of Drummond, in Watts, New Apologetic, 332; and in Murphy,
Nat. Selection and Spir. Freedom, 19-21, 77-124. While Drummond is an annihilationist,
Murphy is a restorationist. More rational and Scriptural than either of these is the
saying of Tower: <q>Sin is God's foe. He does not annihilate it, but he makes it the
means of displaying his holiness; as the Romans did not slay their captured enemies,
but made them their servants.</q> The terms αἰών and αἰώνιος, which we have still to consider,
afford additional Scripture testimony against annihilation. See also the argument
from the divine justice, pages 1046-1051; article on the Doctrine of Extinction, in New
Englander, March, 1879:201-224; Hovey, Manual of Theology and Ethics, 153-168; J. S.
Barlow, Endless Being; W. H. Robinson, on Conditional Immortality, in Report of
Baptist Congress for 1886.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Since neither one of these two forms of the annihilation theory is
Scriptural or rational, we avail ourselves of the evolutionary hypothesis as
throwing light upon the problem. Death is not degeneracy ending in
extinction, nor punishment ending in extinction,&mdash;it is atavism that returns,
or tends to return, to the animal type. As moral development is from the
brute to man, so abnormal development is from man to the brute.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Lord Byron: <q>All suffering doth destroy, or is destroyed.</q> This is true, not of man's
being, but of his well being. Ribot, Diseases of the Will, 115&mdash;<q>Dissolution pursues a
regressive course from the more voluntary and more complex to the less voluntary and
more simple, that is to say, toward the automatic. One of the first signs of mental
impairment is incapacity for sustained attention. Unity, stability, power, have ceased,
and the end is extinction of the will.</q> We prefer to say, loss of the freedom of the will.
On the principle of evolution, abuse of freedom may result in reversion to the brute,
annihilation not of existence but of higher manhood, punishment from within rather
than from without, eternal penalty in the shape of eternal loss. <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 24:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that endureth
to the end, the same shall be saved</hi></q>&mdash;has for its parallel passage <hi rend='italic'>Luke 21:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>In your patience ye shall
win your souls,</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, shall by free will get possession of your own being. Losing one's soul
is just the opposite, namely, losing one's free will, by disuse renouncing freedom, becoming
a victim of habit, nature, circumstance, and this is the cutting off and annihilation
of true manhood. <q>To be in hell is to drift; to be in heaven is to steer</q> (Bernard Shaw).
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>John 15:2</hi> Christ says of all men&mdash;the natural branches of the vine&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Every branch in me
that beareth not fruit, he taketh it away</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 49:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Man that is in honor, and understandeth not, Is like the beasts
that perish</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 22:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Without are the dogs.</hi></q> In heathen fable men were turned into beasts,
and even into trees. The story of Circe is a parable of human fate,&mdash;men may become
apes, tigers, or swine. They may lose their higher powers of consciousness and will.
By perpetual degradation they may suffer eternal punishment. All life that is worthy
of the name may cease, while still existence of a low animal type is prolonged. We see
precisely these results of sin in this world. We have reason to believe that the same
laws of development will operate in the world to come.
</p>

<p>
McConnell, Evolution of Immortality, 85-95, 99, 124, 180&mdash;<q>Immortality, or survival
after death, depends upon man's freeing himself from the law which sweeps away the
many, and becoming an individual (indivisible) that is fit to survive. The individual must
become stronger than the species. By using will aright, he lays hold of the infinite
Life, and becomes one who, like Christ, has <q><hi rend='italic'>life in himself</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>John 5:26</hi>). Gravitation and
chemical affinity had their way in the universe until they were arrested and turned
about in the interest of life. Overproduction, death, and the survival of the fittest, had
their ruthless sway until they were reversed in the interest of affection. The supremacy
of the race at the expense of the individual we may expect to continue until something
in the individual comes to be of more importance than that law, and no longer....
Goodness can arrest and turn back for nations the primal law of growth, vigor, and
decline. Is it too much to believe that it may do the same for an individual man?...
Life is a thing to be achieved. At every step there are a thousand candidates who fail,
for one that attains.... Until moral sensibility becomes self-conscious, all question
of personal immortality becomes irrelevant, because there is, accurately speaking, no
personality to be immortal. Up to that point the individual living creature, whether in
human form or not, falls short of that essential personality for which eternal life can
<pb n='1039'/><anchor id='Pg1039'/>
have any meaning.</q> But how about children who never come to moral consciousness?
McConnell appeals to heredity. The child of one who has himself achieved immortality
may also prove to be immortal. But is there no chance for the children of sinners?
The doctrine of McConnell leans toward the true solution, but it is vitiated by the belief
that individuality is a transient gift which only goodness can make permanent. We
hold on the other hand that this gift of God is <q><hi rend='italic'>without repentance</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 11:29</hi>), and that no
human being can lose life, except in the sense of losing all that makes life desirable.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. Punishment after death excludes new probation and ultimate restoration
of the wicked.</head>

<p>
Some have maintained the ultimate restoration of all
human beings, by appeal to such passages as the following: Mat. 19:28;
Acts 3:21; Eph. 1:9, 10.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 19:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Acts 3:21</hi>&mdash;Jesus,
<q><hi rend='italic'>whom the heaven must receive until the times of restoration of all things</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The last enemy that shall
be abolished is death</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:9, 10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>according to his good pleasure which he purposed in him unto a dispensation
of the fulness of the times, to sum up all things in Christ, the things in the heavens, and the things upon the earth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Phil.
2:10, 11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven and things on earth and things under
the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Pet. 3:9, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>not
wishing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance ... But, according to his promise, we
look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Robert Browning: <q>That God, by God's own ways occult, May&mdash;doth, I will believe&mdash;bring
back All wanderers to a single track.</q> B. W. Lockhart: <q>I must believe
that evil is essentially transient and mortal, or alter my predicates of God. And
I must believe in the ultimate extinction of that personality whom the power of God
cannot sometime win to goodness. The only alternative is the termination of a wicked
life either through redemption or through extinction.</q> Mulford, Republic of God,
claims that the soul's state cannot be fixed by any event, such as death, outside of
itself. If it could, the soul would exist, not under a moral government, but under fate,
and God himself would be only another name for fate. The soul carries its fate, under
God, in its power of choice; and who dares to say that this power to choose the good
ceases at death?
</p>

<p>
For advocacy of a second probation for those who have not consciously rejected
Christ in this life, see Newman Smyth's edition of Dorner's Eschatology. For the theory
of restoration, see Farrar, Eternal Hope; Birks, Victory of Divine Goodness; Jukes,
Restitution of All Things; Delitzsch, Bib. Psychologie, 469-476; Robert Browning,
Apparent Failure; Tennyson, In Memoriam, § liv. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Hovey, Bib. Eschatology,
95-144. See also, Griffith-Jones, Ascent through Christ, 406-440.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) These passages, as obscure, are to be interpreted in the light of
those plainer ones which we have already cited. Thus interpreted, they
foretell only the absolute triumph of the divine kingdom, and the subjection
of all evil to God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The true interpretation of the passages above mentioned is indicated in Meyer's note
on <hi rend='italic'>Eph. 1:9, 10</hi>&mdash;this namely, that <q>the allusion is not to the restoration of <emph>fallen individuals</emph>,
but to the restoration of <emph>universal harmony</emph>, implying that the wicked are to
be excluded from the kingdom of God.</q> That there is no allusion to a probation after
this life, is clear from <hi rend='italic'>Luke 16:19-31</hi>&mdash;the parable of the rich man and Lazarus. Here
penalty is inflicted for the sins done <q><hi rend='italic'>in thy lifetime</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>v. 25</hi>); this penalty is unchangeable&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>there
is a great gulf fixed</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>v. 26</hi>); the rich man asks favors for his brethren who still live
on the earth, but none for himself (<hi rend='italic'>v. 27, 28</hi>). <hi rend='italic'>John 5:25-29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The hour cometh, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself, even
so gave he to the Son also to have life in himself: and he gave him authority to execute judgment, because he is a son of
man. Marvel not at this: for the hour cometh, in which all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, until the resurrection of judgment</hi></q>&mdash;here
it is declared that, while for those who have done good there is a resurrection
of life, there is for those who have done ill only a resurrection of judgment. <hi rend='italic'>John
8:21, 24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>shall die in your sin: whither I go, ye cannot come ... except ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in
your sins</hi></q>&mdash;sayings which indicate finality in the decisions of this life.
</p>

<p>
Orr, Christian View of God and the World, 243&mdash;<q>Scripture invariably represents the
judgment as proceeding on the data of this life, and it concentrates every ray of appeal
into the present.</q> <hi rend='italic'>John 9:4</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>We must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh
<pb n='1040'/><anchor id='Pg1040'/>
when no man can work</hi></q>&mdash;intimates that there is no opportunity to secure salvation after
death. The Christian hymn writer has caught the meaning of Scripture, when he says
of those who have passed through the gate of death: <q>Fixed in an eternal state, They
have done with all below; We a little longer wait; But how little, none can know.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) A second probation is not needed to vindicate the justice or the love
of God, since Christ, the immanent God, is already in this world present
with every human soul, quickening the conscience, giving to each man his
opportunity, and making every decision between right and wrong a true
probation. In choosing evil against their better judgment even the heathen
unconsciously reject Christ. Infants and idiots, as they have not consciously
sinned, are, as we may believe, saved at death by having Christ revealed to
them and by the regenerating influence of his Spirit.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 1:18-28</hi>&mdash;there is probation under the light of nature as well as under the gospel,
and under the law of nature as well as under the gospel men may be given up <q><hi rend='italic'>unto a
reprobate mind</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2:6-16</hi>&mdash;Gentiles shall be judged, not by the gospel, but by the law of
nature, and shall <q><hi rend='italic'>perish without the law ... in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor.
5:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>For we must all be made manifest before the judgment-seat of Christ</hi>; [not that each may have a
new opportunity to secure salvation, but] <hi rend='italic'>that each one may receive the things done in the body,
according to what he hath done, whether it be good or bad</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 6:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whose end is to be burned</hi></q>&mdash;not to
be quickened again; <hi rend='italic'>9:27</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And inasmuch as it is appointed unto men once to die, and after this cometh</hi>
[not a second probation, but] <hi rend='italic'>judgment.</hi></q> Luckock, Intermediate State, 22&mdash;<q>In <hi rend='italic'>Heb.
9:27</hi>, the word <q><hi rend='italic'>judgment</hi></q> has no article. The judgment alluded to is not the final or
general judgment, but only that by which the place of the soul is determined in the
Intermediate State.</q>
</p>

<p>
Denney, Studies in Theology, 243&mdash;<q>In <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25</hi>, our Lord gives a pictorial representation
of the judgment of the heathen. All nations&mdash;all the Gentiles&mdash;are gathered before
the King; and their destiny is determined, not by their conscious acceptance or rejection
of the historical Savior, but by their unconscious acceptance or rejection of him
in the persons of those who needed services of love.... This does not square with the
idea of a future probation. It rather tells us plainly that men may do things of final
and decisive import in this life, even if Christ is unknown to them.... The real argument
against future probation is that it depreciates the present life, and denies the
infinite significance that, under all conditions, essentially and inevitably belongs to the
actions of a self-conscious moral being. A type of will may be in process of formation,
even in a heathen man, on which eternal issues depend.... Second probation lowers
the moral tone of the spirit. The present life acquires a relative unimportance. I dare
not say that if I forfeit the opportunity the present life gives me I shall ever have
another, and therefore I dare not say so to another man.</q>
</p>

<p>
For an able review of the Scripture testimony against a second probation, see G. F.
Wright, Relation of Death to Probation, iv. Emerson, the most recent advocate of
restorationism, in his Doctrine of Probation Examined, 42, is able to evade these latter
passages only by assuming that they are to be spiritually interpreted, and that there is
to be no literal outward day of judgment&mdash;an error which we have previously discussed
and refuted,&mdash;see pages <ref target='Pg1024'>1024</ref>, <ref target='Pg1025'>1025</ref>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The advocates of universal restoration are commonly the most strenuous
defenders of the inalienable freedom of the human will to make choices
contrary to its past character and to all the motives which are or can be
brought to bear upon it. As a matter of fact, we find in this world that
men choose sin in spite of infinite motives to the contrary. Upon the
theory of human freedom just mentioned, no motives which God can use
will certainly accomplish the salvation of all moral creatures. The soul
which resists Christ here may resist him forever.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Emerson, in the book just referred to, says: <q>The truth that sin is in its permanent
essence a free choice, however for a time it may be held in mechanical combination
with the notion of moral opportunity arbitrarily closed, can never mingle with it, and
must in the logical outcome permanently cast it off. Scripture presumes and teaches
<pb n='1041'/><anchor id='Pg1041'/>
the constant capability of souls to obey as well as to be disobedient.</q> Emerson is correct.
If the doctrine of the unlimited ability of the human will be a true one, then
restoration in the future world is possible. Clement and Origen founded on this theory
of will their denial of future punishment. If will be essentially the power of contrary
choice, and if will may act independently of all character and motive, there can be no
objective certainty that the lost will remain sinful. In short, there can be no finality,
even to God's allotments, nor is any <emph>last</emph> judgment possible. Upon this view, regeneration
and conversion are as possible at any time in the future as they are to-day.
</p>

<p>
But those who hold to this defective philosophy of the will should remember that
unlimited freedom is unlimited freedom to sin, as well as unlimited freedom to turn to
God. If restoration is possible, endless persistence in evil is possible also; and this last
the Scripture predicts. Whittier: <q>What if thine eye refuse to see, Thine ear of heaven's
free welcome fail, And thou a willing captive be, Thyself thine own dark jail?</q>
Swedenborg says that the man who obstinately refuses the inheritance of the sons of
God is allowed the pleasures of the beast, and enjoys in his own low way the hell to
which he has confined himself. Every occupant of hell prefers it to heaven. Dante,
Hell, iv&mdash;<q>All here together come from every clime, And to o'erpass the river are
not loth, For so heaven's justice goads them on, that fear Is turned into desire.
Hence never passed good spirit.</q> The lost are <hi rend='italic'>Heautoutimoroumenoi</hi>, or self-tormentors,
to adopt the title of Terence's play. See Whedon, in Meth. Quar. Rev.,
Jan. 1884; Robbins, in Bib. Sac., 1881:460-507.
</p>

<p>
Denney, Studies in Theology, 255&mdash;<q>The very conception of human freedom involves
the possibility of its permanent misuse, or of what our Lord himself calls <q><hi rend='italic'>eternal sin</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mark
3:29</hi>).</q> Shedd, Dogm. Theology, 2:699&mdash;<q>Origen's restorationism grew naturally out of
his view of human liberty</q>&mdash;the liberty of indifference&mdash;<q>endless alternations of falls
and recoveries, of hells and heavens; so that practically he taught nothing but a hell.</q>
J. C. Adams, The Leisure of God: <q>It is lame logic to maintain the inviolable freedom
of the will, and at the same time insist that God can, through his ample power, through
protracted punishment, bring the soul into a disposition which it does not wish to feel.
There is no compulsory holiness possible. In our Civil War there was some talk of
<q>compelling men to volunteer,</q> but the idea was soon seen to involve a self-contradiction.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Upon the more correct view of the will which we have advocated,
the case is more hopeless still. Upon this view, the sinful soul, in its very
sinning, gives to itself a sinful bent of intellect, affection, and will; in other
words, makes for itself a character, which, though it does not render necessary,
yet does render certain, apart from divine grace, the continuance of
sinful action. In itself it finds a self-formed motive to evil strong enough
to prevail over all inducements to holiness which God sees it wise to bring
to bear. It is in the next world, indeed, subjected to suffering. But suffering
has in itself no reforming power. Unless accompanied by special
renewing influences of the Holy Spirit, it only hardens and embitters the
soul. We have no Scripture evidence that such influences of the Spirit are
exerted, after death, upon the still impenitent; but abundant evidence, on
the contrary, that the moral condition in which death finds men is their
condition forever.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Bushnell's <q>One Trial Better than Many,</q> in Sermons on Living Subjects; also
see his Forgiveness and Law, 146, 147. Bushnell argues that God would give us fifty
trials, if that would do us good. But there is no possibility of such result. The first
decision adverse to God renders it more difficult to make a right decision upon the next
opportunity. Character tends to fixity, and each new opportunity may only harden the
heart and increase its guilt and condemnation. We should have no better chance of
salvation if our lives were lengthened to the term of the sinners before the flood. Mere
suffering does not convert the soul; see Martineau, Study, 2:100. A life of pain did
not make Blanco White a believer; see Mozley, Hist. and Theol. Essays, vol. 2, essay 1.
</p>

<pb n='1042'/><anchor id='Pg1042'/>

<p>
Edward A. Lawrence, Does Everlasting Punishment Last Forever?&mdash;<q>If the deeds of
the law do not justify here, how can the penalties of the law hereafter? The pain from
a broken limb does nothing to mend the break, and the suffering from disease does
nothing to cure it. Penalty pays no debts,&mdash;it only shows the outstanding and unsettled
accounts.</q> If the will does not act without motive, then it is certain that without
motives men will never repent. To an impenitent and rebellious sinner the motive must
come, not from within, but from without. Such motives God presents by his Spirit in
this life; but when this life ends and God's Spirit is withdrawn, no motives to repentance
will be presented. The soul's dislike for God will issue only in complaint and
resistance. Shakespeare, Hamlet, 3:4&mdash;<q>Try what repentance can? what can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?</q> Marlowe, Faustus: <q>Hell hath no limits,
nor is circumscribed In one self place; for where we are is hell, And where hell is, there
we must ever be.</q>
</p>

<p>
The pressure of the atmosphere without is counteracted by the resistance of the
atmosphere within the body. So God's life within is the only thing that can enable us
to bear God's afflictive dispensations without. Without God's Spirit to inspire repentance
the wicked man in this world never feels sorrow for his deeds, except as he realizes
their evil consequences. Physical anguish and punishment inspire hatred, not of sin,
but of the effects of sin. The remorse of Judas induced confession, but not true repentance.
So in the next world punishment will secure recognition of God and of his justice,
on the part of the transgressor, but it will not regenerate or save. The penalties of
the future life will be no more effectual to reform the sinner than were the invitations
of Christ and the strivings of the Holy Spirit in the present life. The transientness of
good resolves which are forced out of us by suffering is illustrated by the old couplet:
<q>The devil was sick,&mdash;the devil a monk would be; The devil got well,&mdash;the devil a monk
was he.</q>
</p>

<p>
Charles G. Sewall: <q>Paul Lester Ford, the novelist, was murdered by his brother
Malcolm, because the father of the two brothers had disinherited the one who committed
the crime. Has God the right to disinherit any one of his children? We answer
that God disinherits no one. Each man decides for himself whether he will accept the
inheritance. It is a matter of character. A father cannot give his son an education.
The son may play truant and throw away his opportunity. The prodigal son disinherited
himself. Heaven is not a place,&mdash;it is a way of living, a condition of being. If
you have a musical ear, I will admit you to a lovely concert. If you have not a musical
ear, I may give you a reserved seat and you will hear no melody. Some men fail of salvation
because they have no taste for it and will not have it.</q>
</p>

<p>
The laws of God's universe are closing in upon the impenitent sinner, as the iron walls
of the mediæval prison closed in night by night upon the victim,&mdash;each morning there
was one window less, and the dungeon came to be a coffin. In Jean Ingelow's poem
<q>Divided,</q> two friends, parted by a little rivulet across which they could clasp hands,
walk on in the direction in which the stream is flowing, till the rivulet becomes a
brook, and the brook a river, and the river an arm of the sea across which no voice
can be heard and there is no passing. By constant neglect to use our opportunity, we
lose the power to cross from sin to righteousness, until between the soul and God
<q><hi rend='italic'>there is a great gulf fixed</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Luke 16:26</hi>).
</p>

<p>
John G. Whittier wrote within a twelvemonth of his death: <q>I do believe that we take
with us into the next world the same freedom of will we have here, and that <emph>there</emph>, as
<emph>here</emph>, he that turns to the Lord will find mercy; that God never ceases to follow his creatures
with love, and is always ready to hear the prayer of the penitent. But I also
believe that <emph>now</emph> is the accepted time, and that he who dallies with sin may find the
chains of evil habit too strong to break in this world or the other.</q> And the following
is the Quaker poet's verse: <q>Though God be good and free be heaven, Not force divine
can love compel; And though the song of sins forgiven Might sound through lowest
hell, The sweet persuasion of his voice Respects the sanctity of will. He giveth day;
thou hast thy choice To walk in darkness still.</q>
</p>

<p>
Longfellow, Masque of Pandora: <q>Never by lapse of time The soul defaced by crime
Into its former self returns again; For every guilty deed Holds in itself the seed Of
retribution and undying pain. Never shall be the loss Restored, till Helios Hath
purified them with his heavenly fires; Then what was lost is won, And the new life
begun, Kindled with nobler passions and desires.</q> Seth, Freedom as Ethical Postulate,
42&mdash;<q>Faust's selling his soul to Mephistopheles, and signing the contract with his
life's blood, is no single transaction, done deliberately, on one occasion; rather, that is
<pb n='1043'/><anchor id='Pg1043'/>
the lurid meaning of a life which consists of innumerable individual acts,&mdash;the life of
evil means that.</q> See John Caird, Fundamental Ideas of Christianity, 2:88; Crane,
Religion of To-morrow, 315.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The declaration as to Judas, in Mat. 26:24, could not be true upon
the hypothesis of a final restoration. If at any time, even after the lapse of
ages, Judas be redeemed, his subsequent infinite duration of blessedness
must outweigh all the finite suffering through which he has passed. The
Scripture statement that <q>good were it for that man if he had not been
born</q> must be regarded as a refutation of the theory of universal restoration.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 26:24</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>The Son of man goeth, even as it is written of him: but woe unto that man through whom the Son of
man is betrayed! good were it for that man if he had not been born.</hi></q> G. F. Wright, Relation of Death to
Probation: <q>As Christ of old healed only those who came or were brought to him, so
now he waits for the coöperation of human agency. God has limited himself to an
orderly method in human salvation. The consuming missionary zeal of the apostles
and the early church shows that they believed the decisions of this life to be final decisions.
The early church not only thought the heathen world would perish without the
gospel, but they found a conscience in the heathen answering to this belief. The solicitude
drawn out by this responsibility for our fellows may be one means of securing the
moral stability of the future. What is bound on earth is bound in heaven; else why not
pray for the wicked dead?</q> It is certainly a remarkable fact, if this theory be true,
that we have in Scripture not a single instance of prayer for the dead.
</p>

<p>
The apocryphal 2 Maccabees 12:39 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> gives an instance of Jewish prayer for the dead.
Certain who were slain had concealed under their coats things consecrated to idols.
Judas and his host therefore prayed that this sin might be forgiven to the slain, and
they contributed 2,000 drachmas of silver to send a sin offering for them to Jerusalem.
So modern Jews pray for the dead; see Luckock, After Death, 54-66&mdash;an argument for
such prayer. John Wesley, Works, 9:55, maintains the legality of prayer for the dead.
Still it is true that we have no instance of such prayer in canonical Scriptures. <hi rend='italic'>Ps.
132:1</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Jehovah, remember for David All his affliction</hi></q>&mdash;is not a prayer for the dead, but signifies:
<q><hi rend='italic'>Remember for David</hi></q>, so as to fulfil thy promise to him, <q><hi rend='italic'>all his anxious cares</hi></q>&mdash;with regard to
the building of the temple; the psalm having been composed, in all probability, for the
temple dedication. Paul prays that God will <q><hi rend='italic'>grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 1:16</hi>),
from which it has been unwarrantably inferred that Onesiphorus was dead at the time
of the apostle's writing; but Paul's further prayer in <hi rend='italic'>verse 18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the Lord grant unto him to find
mercy of the Lord in that day</hi></q>&mdash;seems rather to point to the death of Onesiphorus as yet in the
future.
</p>

<p>
Shedd, Dogm. Theology, 2:715 note&mdash;<q>Many of the arguments constructed against
the doctrine of endless punishment proceed upon the supposition that original sin, or
man's evil inclination, is the work of God: that because man is <emph>born</emph> in sin (<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 51:5</hi>),
he was <emph>created</emph> in sin. All the strength and plausibility of John Foster's celebrated
letter lies in the assumption that the moral corruption and impotence of the sinner,
whereby it is impossible to save himself from eternal death, is not self-originated and
self-determined, but infused by his Maker. <q>If,</q> says he, <q>the very nature of man, as
<emph>created</emph> by the Sovereign Power, be in such desperate disorder that there is no possibility
of conversion or salvation except in instances where that Power interposes with
a special and redeeming efficacy, how can we conceive that the main portion of the race,
thus morally impotent (that is, really and absolutely impotent), will be eternally punished
for the inevitable result of this moral impotence?</q> If this assumption of concreated
depravity and impotence is correct, Foster's objection to eternal retribution is
conclusive and fatal.... Endless punishment supposes the freedom of the human
will, and is impossible without it. Self-determination runs parallel with hell.</q>
</p>

<p>
The theory of a second probation, as recently advocated, is not only a logical result of
that defective view of the will already mentioned, but it is also in part a consequence of
denying the old orthodox and Pauline doctrine of the organic unity of the race in
Adam's first transgression. New School Theology has been inclined to deride the notion
of a fair probation of humanity in our first father, and of a common sin and guilt of
mankind in him. It cannot find what it regards as a fair probation for each individual
since that first sin; and the conclusion is easy that there must be such a fair probation
for each individual in the world to come. But we may advise those who take this view
<pb n='1044'/><anchor id='Pg1044'/>
to return to the old theology. Grant a fair probation for the whole race already passed,
and the condition of mankind is no longer that of mere unfortunates unjustly circumstanced,
but rather that of beings guilty and condemned, to whom present opportunity,
and even present existence, is a matter of pure grace,&mdash;much more the general provision
of a salvation, and the offer of it to any human soul. This world is already a place
of second probation; and since the second probation is due wholly to God's mercy, no
probation after death is needed to vindicate either the justice or the goodness of God.
See Kellogg, in Presb. Rev., April, 1885:226-256; Cremer, Beyond the Grave, preface by
A. A. Hodge, xxxvi <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. D. Morris, Is There Salvation After Death? A. H. Strong,
on The New Theology, in Bap. Quar. Rev., Jan. 1888,&mdash;reprinted in Philosophy and
Religion, 164-179.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>C. Scripture declares this future punishment of the wicked to be eternal.</head>

<p>
It does this by its use of the terms αἰών, αἰώνιος.&mdash;Some, however, maintain
that these terms do not necessarily imply eternal duration. We reply:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It must be conceded that these words do not <emph>etymologically</emph> necessitate
the idea of eternity; and that, as expressing the idea of <q>age-long,</q>
they are sometimes used in a limited or rhetorical sense.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 1:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before times eternal</hi></q>&mdash;but the
past duration of the world is limited; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 9:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>now once at the end of the ages hath he been manifested</hi></q>&mdash;here
the αἰῶνες have an end; <hi rend='italic'>Tit. 1:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>eternal life ... promised before times eternal</hi></q>; but
here there may be a reference to the eternal covenant of the Father with the Son; <hi rend='italic'>Jer.
31:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I have loved thee with an everlasting love</hi></q> = a love which antedated time; <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 16:25, 26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the
mystery which hath been kept in silence through times eternal ... according to the commandment of the
eternal God</hi></q>&mdash;here <q><hi rend='italic'>eternal</hi></q> is used in the same verse in two senses. It is argued that in <hi rend='italic'>Mat.
25:46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>these shall go away into eternal punishment</hi></q>&mdash;the word <q><hi rend='italic'>eternal</hi></q> may be used in the narrower
sense.
</p>

<p>
Arthur Chambers, Our Life after Death, 222-236&mdash;<q>In <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 13:39</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the harvest is the end of the</hi>
αἰών,</q> and in <hi rend='italic'>2 Tim. 4:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Demas forsook me, having loved this present</hi> αἰών</q>&mdash;the word αἰών clearly
implies limitation of time. Why not take the word αἰών in this sense in <hi rend='italic'>Mark 3:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>hath
never forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin</hi></q>? We must not translate αἰών by <q><hi rend='italic'>world</hi>,</q> and so
express limitation, while we translate αἰώνιος by <q><hi rend='italic'>eternal</hi>,</q> and so express endlessness which
excludes limitation; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Gen. 13:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed forever</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Num. 25:13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>it shall be unto him</hi> [Phinehas], <hi rend='italic'>and to his seed after him, the covenant of an everlasting priesthood</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Josh. 24:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>your fathers dwelt of old time</hi> [from eternity] <hi rend='italic'>beyond the River</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Deut. 23:3</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>An Ammonite
or a Moabite shall not enter ... into the assembly of Jehovah for ever</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 24:7, 8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>be ye lifted up, ye everlasting
doors.</hi></q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(b) They do, however, express the longest possible duration of which
the subject to which they are attributed is capable; so that, if the soul is
immortal, its punishment must be without end.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gen. 49:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the everlasting hills</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>17:8, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I will give unto thee ... all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting
possession ... my covenant</hi> [of circumcision] <hi rend='italic'>shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Ex.
21:6</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he</hi> [the slave] <hi rend='italic'>shall serve him</hi> [his master] <hi rend='italic'>for ever</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Chron. 6:2</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But I have built thee an
house of habitation, and a place for thee to dwell in for ever</hi></q>&mdash;of the temple at Jerusalem; <hi rend='italic'>Jude 6, 7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>angels
... he hath kept in everlasting bonds under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Even as Sodom and
Gomorrah ... are set forth as an example, suffering the punishment of eternal fire</hi></q>&mdash;here in <hi rend='italic'>Jude 6</hi>, bonds
which endure only to the judgment day are called ἀϊδίοις (the same word which is used
in <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 1:20</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>his everlasting power and divinity</hi></q>), and fire which lasts only till Sodom and
Gomorrah are consumed is called αἰωνίον. Shedd, Dogm. Theology, 2:687&mdash;<q>To hold
land forever is to hold it as long as grass grows and water runs, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, as long as this
world or æon endures.</q>
</p>

<p>
In all the passages cited above, the condition denoted by αἰώνιος lasts as long as the
object endures of which it is predicated. But we have seen (pages <ref target='Pg982'>982-998</ref>) that physical
death is not the end of man's existence, and that the soul, made in the image of God,
is immortal. A punishment, therefore, that lasts as long as the soul, must be an everlasting
punishment. Another interpretation of the passages in Jude is, however,
entirely possible. It is maintained by many that the <q><hi rend='italic'>everlasting bonds</hi></q> of the fallen
angels do not cease at the judgment, and that Sodom and Gomorrah suffer <q><hi rend='italic'>the punishment
<pb n='1045'/><anchor id='Pg1045'/>
of eternal fire</hi></q> in the sense that their condemnation at the judgment will be a continuation
of that begun in the time of Lot (see <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 10:15</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city</hi></q>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) If, when used to describe the future punishment of the wicked, they
do not declare the endlessness of that punishment, there are no words in
the Greek language which could express that meaning.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
C. F. Wright, Relation of Death to Probation: <q>The Bible writers speak of eternity
in terms of time, and make the impression more vivid by reduplicating the longest
time-words they had [<hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων = <q>unto the ages of the ages</q>]. Plato
contrasts χρόνος and αἰών, as we do time and eternity, and Aristotle says that eternity
[αἰών] belongs to God.... The Scriptures have taught the doctrine of eternal punishment
as clearly as their general style allows.</q> The destiny of lost men is bound up
with the destiny of evil angels in <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:41</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Depart from me, ye cursed, into the eternal fire which is
prepared for the devil and his angels.</hi></q> If the latter are hopelessly lost, then the former are hopelessly
lost also.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) In the great majority of Scripture passages where they occur, they
have unmistakably the signification <q>everlasting.</q> They are used to
express the eternal duration of God, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
(Rom. 16:26; 1 Tim. 1:17; Heb. 9:14; Rev. 1:18); the abiding presence
of the Holy Spirit with all true believers (John 14:17); and the
endlessness of the future happiness of the saints (Mat. 19:29; John 6:54,
58; 2 Cor. 9:9).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 16:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the commandment of the eternal God</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 1:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Now unto the King eternal, incorruptible,
invisible, the only God, be honor and glory for ever and ever</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 9:14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the eternal Spirit</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 1:17, 18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>I am
the first and the last, and the Living one; and I was dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 14:16, 17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, even the Spirit of
truth</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 19:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>every one that hath left houses, or brethren, or sisters ... for my name's sake, shall receive
a hundredfold, and shall inherit eternal life</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 6:54, 58</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath
eternal life.... he that eateth this bread shall live for ever</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 9:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>His righteousness abideth for ever</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Dan. 7:18</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But the saints of the Most High shall receive the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever
and ever.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Everlasting punishment is sometimes said to be the punishment which takes place in,
and belongs to, an αἰών, with no reference to duration. But President Woolsey declares,
on the other hand, that <q>αἰώνιος cannot denote <q>pertaining to an αἰών, or world period.</q></q>
The punishment of the wicked cannot cease, any more than Christ can cease to live, or
the Holy Spirit to abide with believers; for all these are described in the same terms;
<q>αἰώνιος is used in the N. T. 66 times,&mdash;51 times of the happiness of the righteous, 2 times
of the duration of God and his glory, 6 times where there is no doubt as to its meaning
<q>eternal,</q> 7 times of the punishment of the wicked; αἰών is used 95 times,&mdash;55 times of
unlimited duration, 31 times of duration that has limits, 9 times to denote the duration
of future punishment.</q> See Joseph Angus, in Expositor, Oct. 1887:274-286.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The fact that the same word is used in Mat. 25:46 to describe both
the sufferings of the wicked and the happiness of the righteous shows that
the misery of the lost is eternal, in the same sense as the life of God or the
blessedness of the saved.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And these shall go away into eternal punishment: but the righteous into eternal life.</hi></q> On this
passage see Meyer: <q>The absolute idea of eternity, in respect to the punishments of
hell, is not to be set aside, either by an appeal to the popular use of αἰώνιος, or by an
appeal to the figurative term <q>fire</q>; to the incompatibility of the idea of the eternal
with that of moral evil and its punishment, or to the warning design of the representation;
but it stands fast exegetically, by means of the contrasted ζωὴν αἰώνιον, which signifies
the endless Messianic life.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) Other descriptions of the condemnation and suffering of the lost,
excluding, as they do, all hope of repentance or forgiveness, render it certain
<pb n='1046'/><anchor id='Pg1046'/>
that αἰών and αἰώνιος, in the passages referred to, describe a punishment
that is without end.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 12:31, 32</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the Spirit shall
not be forgiven.... it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in that which is to come</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>25:10</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and
the door was shut</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mark 3:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit hath never forgiveness, but is
guilty of an eternal sin</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>9:43, 48</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>to go into hell, into the unquenchable fire ... where their worm dieth not,
and the fire is not quenched</hi></q>&mdash;not the dying worm but the undying worm; not the fire that
is quenched, but the fire that is unquenchable; <hi rend='italic'>Luke 3:17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>the chaff he will burn up with
unquenchable fire</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>16:26</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, that they that would pass from hence to
you may not be able, and that none may cross over from thence to us</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>John 3:36</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>he that obeyeth not the Son shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Review of Farrar's Eternal Hope, in Bib. Sac., Oct. 1878:782&mdash;<q>The original meaning
of the English word <q>hell</q> and <q>damn</q> was precisely that of the Greek words for
which they stand. Their present meaning is widely different, but from what did it
arise? It arose from the connotation imposed upon these words by the impression the
Scriptures made on the popular mind. The present meaning of these words is involved
in the Scripture, and cannot be removed by any mechanical process. Change the words,
and in a few years <q>judge</q> will have in the Bible the same force that <q>damn</q> has at
present. In fact, the words were not mistranslated, but the connotation of which Dr.
Farrar complains has come upon them since, and that through the Scriptures. This
proves what the general impression of Scripture upon the mind is, and shows how far
Dr. Farrar has gone astray.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) While, therefore, we grant that we do not know the nature of
eternity, or its relation to time, we maintain that the Scripture representations
of future punishment forbid both the hypothesis of annihilation, and
the hypothesis that suffering will end in restoration. Whatever eternity
may be, Scripture renders it certain that after death there is no forgiveness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We regard the argument against endless punishment drawn from αἰών and αἰώνιος as
a purely verbal one which does not touch the heart of the question at issue. We append
several utterances of its advocates. The Christian Union: <q>Eternal punishment is
punishment in eternity, not throughout eternity; as temporal punishment is punishment
in time, not throughout time.</q> Westcott: <q>Eternal life is not an endless duration
of being in time, but being of which time is not a measure. We have indeed no
powers to grasp the idea except through forms and images of sense. These must be
used, but we must not transfer them to realities of another order.</q>
</p>

<p>
Farrar holds that ἀΐδιος, <q><hi rend='italic'>everlasting</hi></q>, which occurs but twice in the N. T. (<hi rend='italic'>Rom. 1:20</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Jude 6</hi>), is not a synonym of αἰώνιος, <q><hi rend='italic'>eternal</hi></q>, but the direct antithesis of it; the former
being the unrealizable conception of endless time, and the latter referring to a state
from which our imperfect human conception of time is absolutely excluded. Whiton,
Gloria Patri, 145, claims that the perpetual immanence of God in conscience makes
recovery possible after death; yet he speaks of the possibility that in the incorrigible
sinner conscience may become extinct. To all these views we may reply with Schaff,
Ch. History, 2:66&mdash;<q>After the general judgment we have nothing revealed but the
boundless prospect of æonian life and æonian death.... Everlasting punishment of
the wicked always was and always will be the orthodox theory.</q>
</p>

<p>
For the view that αἰών and αἰώνιος are used in a limited sense, see De Quincey, Theological
Essays, 1:126-146; Maurice, Essays, 436; Stanley, Life and Letters, 1:485-488;
Farrar, Eternal Hope, 200; Smyth, Orthodox Theology of To-day, 118-123; Chambers,
Life after Death; Whiton, Is Eternal Punishment Endless? For the common orthodox
view, see Fisher and Tyler, in New Englander, March, 1878; Gould, in Bib. Sac., 1880:212-248;
Princeton Review, 1873:620; Shedd, Doctrine of Endless Punishment, 12-117;
Broadus, Com. on <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:45</hi>.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>D. This everlasting punishment of the wicked is not inconsistent with
God's justice, but is rather a revelation of that justice.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) We have seen in our discussion of Penalty (pages 652-656) that its
object is neither reformatory nor deterrent, but simply vindicatory; in
<pb n='1047'/><anchor id='Pg1047'/>
other words, that it primarily aims, not at the good of the offender, nor at
the welfare of society, but at the vindication of law. We have also seen
(pages 269, 291) that justice is not a form of benevolence, but is the expression
and manifestation of God's holiness. Punishment, therefore, as the
inevitable and constant reaction of that holiness against its moral opposite,
cannot come to an end until guilt and sin come to an end.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The fundamental error of Universalism is its denial that penalty is vindicatory, and
that justice is distinct from benevolence. See article on Universalism, in Johnson's
Cyclopædia: <q>The punishment of the wicked, however severe or terrible it may be, is
but a means to a beneficent end; not revengeful, but remedial; not for its own sake, but
for the good of those who suffer its infliction.</q> With this agrees Rev. H. W. Beecher:
<q>I believe that punishment exists, both here and hereafter; but it will not continue
after it ceases to do good. With a God who could give pain for pain's sake, this world
would go out like a candle.</q> But we reply that the doctrine of eternal punishment
is not a doctrine of <q>pain for pain's sake,</q> but of pain for holiness' sake. Punishment
could have no beneficial effect upon the universe, or even upon the offender,
unless it were just and right in itself. And if just and right in itself, then the reason
for its continuance lies, not in any benefit to the universe, or to the sufferer, to accrue
therefrom.
</p>

<p>
F. L. Patton, in Brit. and For. Ev. Rev., Jan. 1878:126-139, on the Philosophy of Punishment&mdash;<q>If
the Universalist's position were true, we should expect to find some manifestations
of love and pity and sympathy in the infliction of the dreadful punishments
of the future. We look in vain for this, however. We read of God's anger, of his judgments,
of his fury, of his taking vengeance; but we get no hint, in any passage which
describes the sufferings of the next world, that they are designed to work the redemption
and recovery of the soul. If the punishments of the wicked were chastisements,
we should expect to see some bright outlook in the Bible-picture of the place of doom.
A gleam of light, one might suppose, might make its way from the celestial city to this
dark abode. The sufferers would catch some sweet refrain of heavenly music which
would be a promise and prophecy of a far-off but coming glory. But there is a finality
about the Scripture statements as to the condition of the lost, which is simply terrible.</q>
</p>

<p>
The reason for punishment lies not in the benevolence, but in the holiness, of God.
That holiness reveals itself in the moral constitution of the universe. It makes itself
felt in conscience&mdash;imperfectly here, fully hereafter. The wrong merits punishment.
The right binds, not because it is the expedient, but because it is the very nature of
God. <q>But the great ethical significance of this word <emph>right</emph> will not be known,</q> (we
quote again from Dr. Patton,) <q>its imperative claims, its sovereign behests, its holy
and imperious sway over the moral creation will not be understood, until we witness,
during the lapse of the judgment hours, the terrible retribution which measures the ill-desert
of wrong.</q> When Dr. Johnson seemed overfearful as to his future, Boswell said
to him: <q>Think of the mercy of your Savior.</q> <q>Sir,</q> replied Johnson, <q>my Savior
has said that he will place some on his right hand, and some on his left.</q>
</p>

<p>
A Universalist during our Civil War announced his conversion to Calvinism, upon the
ground that hell was a military necessity. <q>In <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 12:19</hi>, <q><hi rend='italic'>vengeance</hi>,</q> ἐκδίκησις, means
primarily <q><hi rend='italic'>vindication</hi>.</q> God will show to the sinner and to the universe that the apparent
prosperity of evil was a delusion and a snare</q> (Crane, Religion of To-morrow, 319
note). That strange book, Letters from Hell, shows how memory may increase our
knowledge of past evil deeds, but may lose the knowledge of God's promises. Since we
retain most perfectly that which has been the subject of most constant thought, retribution
may come to us through the operation of the laws of our own nature.
</p>

<p>
Jackson, James Martineau, 193-195&mdash;<q>Plato holds that the wise transgressor will seek,
not shun, his punishment. James Martineau painted a fearful picture of the possible
lashing of conscience. He regarded suffering for sin, though dreadful, yet as altogether
desirable, not to be asked reprieve from, but to be prayed for: <q>Smite, Lord; for thy
mercy's sake, spare not!</q> The soul denied such suffering is not favored, but defrauded.
It learns the truth of its condition, and the truth and the right of the universe are vindicated.</q>
The Connecticut preacher said: <q>My friends, some believe that all will be
saved; but we hope for better things. Chaff and wheat are not to be together always.
One goes to the garner, and the other to the furnace.</q>
</p>

<pb n='1048'/><anchor id='Pg1048'/>

<p>
Shedd, Dogm. Theology, 2:755&mdash;<q>Luxurious ages and luxurious men recalcitrate at
hell, and <q><hi rend='italic'>kick against the goad</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 26:14</hi>). No theological doctrine is more important than
eternal retribution to those modern nations which, like England, Germany and the
United States, are growing rapidly in riches, luxury and earthly power. Without it,
they will infallibly go down in that vortex of sensuality and wickedness that swallowed
up Babylon and Rome. The bestial and shameless vice of the dissolute rich that has
recently been uncovered in the commercial metropolis of the world is a powerful argument
for the necessity and reality of <q><hi rend='italic'>the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:8</hi>).</q> The
conviction that after death there must be punishment for sin has greatly modified the
older Universalism. There is little modern talk of all men, righteous and wicked alike,
entering heaven the moment this life is ended. A purgatorial state must intervene.
E. G. Robinson: <q>Universalism results from an exaggerated idea of the atonement.
There is no genuine Universalism in our day. Restorationism has taken its place.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) But guilt, or ill-desert, is endless. However long the sinner may
be punished, he never ceases to be ill-deserving. Justice, therefore, which
gives to all according to their deserts, cannot cease to punish. Since the
reason for punishment is endless, the punishment itself must be endless.
Even past sins involve an endless guilt, to which endless punishment is
simply the inevitable correlate.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For full statement of this argument that guilt, as never coming to an end, demands
endless punishment, see Shedd, Doctrine of Endless Punishment, 118-163&mdash;<q>Suffering
that is penal can never come to an end, because guilt is the reason for its infliction, and
guilt once incurred, never ceases to be.... One sin makes guilt, and guilt makes
hell.</q> Man does not punish endlessly, because he does not take account of God.
<q>Human punishment is only approximate and imperfect, not absolute and perfect like
the divine. It is not adjusted exactly and precisely to the whole guilt of the offence,
but is more or less modified, first, by not considering its relation to God's honor and
majesty; secondly, by human ignorance of inward motives; and thirdly, by social
expediency.</q> But <q>hell is not a penitentiary.... The Lamb of God is also Lion of the
tribe of Judah.... The human penalty that approaches nearest to the divine is capital
punishment. This punishment has a kind of endlessness. Death is a finality. It
forever separates the murderer from earthly society, even as future punishment separates
forever from the society of God and heaven.</q> See Martineau, Types, 2:65-69.
</p>

<p>
The lapse of time does not convert guilt into innocence. The verdict <q>Guilty for ten
days</q> was Hibernian. Guilt is indivisible and untransferable. The whole of it rests
upon the criminal at every moment. Richelieu: <q>All places are temples, and all seasons
summer, for justice.</q> George Eliot: <q>Conscience is harder than our enemies, knows
more, accuses with more nicety.</q> Shedd: <q>Sin is the only perpetual motion that has
ever been discovered. A slip in youth, committed in a moment, entails lifelong suffering.
The punishment nature inflicts is infinitely longer than the time consumed in
the violation of law, yet the punishment is the legitimate outgrowth of the offence.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Not only eternal guilt, but eternal sin, demands eternal punishment.
So long as moral creatures are opposed to God, they deserve punishment.
Since we cannot measure the power of the depraved will to resist
God, we cannot deny the possibility of endless sinning. Sin tends evermore
to reproduce itself. The Scriptures speak of an <q>eternal sin</q> (Mark
3:29). But it is just in God to visit endless sinning with endless punishment.
Sin, moreover, is not only an act, but also a condition or state, of
the soul; this state is impure and abnormal, involves misery; this misery,
as appointed by God to vindicate law and holiness, is punishment; this
punishment is the necessary manifestation of God's justice. Not the
punishing, but the not-punishing, would impugn his justice; for if it is just
to punish sin at all, it is just to punish it as long as it exists.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mark 3:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit hath never forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal
sin</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 22:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that is unrighteous, let him do unrighteousness still; and he that is filthy, let him be made filthy
still.</hi></q> Calvin: <q>God has the best reason for punishing everlasting sin everlastingly.</q>
<pb n='1049'/><anchor id='Pg1049'/>
President Dwight: <q>Every sinner is condemned for his first sin, and for every sin that
follows, though they continue forever.</q> What Martineau (Study, 2:106) says of this
life, we may apply to the next: <q>Sin being there, it would be simply monstrous that
there should be no suffering.</q>
</p>

<p>
But we must remember that men are finally condemned, not merely for <emph>sins</emph>, but for
<emph>sin</emph>; they are punished, not simply for <emph>acts</emph> of disobedience, but for evil <emph>character</emph>. The
judgment is essentially a remanding of men to their <q><hi rend='italic'>own place</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Acts 1:25</hi>). The soul that
is permanently unlike God cannot dwell with God. The consciences of the wicked will
justify their doom, and they will themselves prefer hell to heaven. He who does not
love God is at war with himself, as well as with God, and cannot be at peace. Even
though there were no positive inflictions from God's hand, the impure soul that has
banished itself from the presence of God and from the society of the holy has in its
own evil conscience a source of torment.
</p>

<p>
And conscience gives us a pledge of the eternity of this suffering. Remorse has no
tendency to exhaust itself. The memory of an evil deed grows not less but more keen
with time, and self-reproach grows not less but more bitter. Ever renewed affirmation
of its evil decision presents to the soul forever new occasion for conviction and shame.
F. W. Robertson speaks of <q>the infinite maddening of remorse.</q> And Dr. Shedd, in
the book above quoted, remarks: <q>Though the will to resist sin may die out of a man,
the conscience to condemn it never can. This remains eternally. And when the process
is complete; when the responsible creature, in the abuse of free agency, has
perfected his ruin; when his will to good is all gone; there remain these two in his
immortal spirit&mdash;sin and conscience, <q><hi rend='italic'>brimstone and fire</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:8</hi>).</q>
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson: <q>The fundamental argument for eternal punishment is the reproductive
power of evil. In the divine law penalty enforces itself. <hi rend='italic'>Rom. 6:19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye presented
your members as servants ... to iniquity unto iniquity.</hi></q> Wherever sin occurs, penalty is inevitable.
No man of sense would now hold to eternal punishment as an objective judicial infliction,
and the sooner we give this up the better. It can be defended only on the ground
of the reactionary power of elective preference, the reduplicating power of moral evil.
We have no right to say that there are no other consequences of sin but natural ones;
but, were this so, every word of threatening in Scripture would still stand. We shall
never be as complete as if we never had sinned. We shall bear the scars of our sins
forever. The eternal law of wrong-doing is that the wrong-doer is cursed thereby,
and harpies and furies follow him into eternity. God does not need to send a policeman
after the sinner; the sinner carries the policeman inside. God does not need to set
up a whipping post to punish the sinner; the sinner finds a whipping post wherever he
goes, and his own conscience applies the lash.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The actual facts of human life and the tendencies of modern science
show that this principle of retributive justice is inwrought into the elements
and forces of the physical and moral universe. On the one hand, habit
begets fixity of character, and in the spiritual world sinful acts, often
repeated, produce a permanent state of sin, which the soul, unaided, cannot
change. On the other hand, organism and environment are correlated to
each other; and in the spiritual world, the selfish and impure find surroundings
corresponding to their nature, while the surroundings react
upon them and confirm their evil character. These principles, if they act
in the next life as they do in this, will ensure increasing and unending punishment.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gal. 6:7, 8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that
soweth unto his own flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>He that is unrighteous, let him do unrighteousness
still: and he that is filthy, let him be made filthy still.</hi></q> Dr. Heman Lincoln, in an article on
Future Retribution (Examiner, April 2, 1885)&mdash;speaks of two great laws of nature
which confirm the Scripture doctrine of retribution. The first is that <q>the tendency of
habit is towards a permanent state. The occasional drinker becomes a confirmed drunkard.
One who indulges in oaths passes into a reckless blasphemer. The gambler who
has wasted a fortune, and ruined his family, is a slave to the card-table. The Scripture
doctrine of retribution is only an extension of this well-known law to the future life.</q>
<pb n='1050'/><anchor id='Pg1050'/>
The second of these laws is that <q>organism and environment must be in harmony.
Through the vast domain of nature, every plant and tree and reptile and bird and mammal
has organs and functions fitted to the climate and atmosphere of its habitat. If a
sudden change occur in climate, from torrid to temperate, or from temperate to arctic;
if the atmosphere change from dry to humid, or from carbonic vapors to pure oxygen,
sudden death is certain to overtake the entire fauna and flora of the region affected,
unless plastic nature changes the organism to conform to the new environment. The
interpreters of the Bible find the same law ordained for the world to come. Surroundings
must correspond to character. A soul in love with sin can find no place in a holy
heaven. If the environment be holy, the character of the beings assigned to it must be
holy also. Nature and Revelation are in perfect accord.</q> See Drummond, Natural Law
in the Spiritual World, chapters: Environment, Persistence of Type, and Degradation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hosea 13:9</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>It is thy destruction, O Israel, that thou art against me, against thy help</hi></q>&mdash;if men are
destroyed, it is because they destroy themselves. Not God, but man himself, makes
hell. Schurman: <q>External punishment is unthinkable of human sins.</q> Jackson,
James Martineau, 152&mdash;<q>Our light, such as we have, we carry with us; and he who in
his soul knows not God is still in darkness though, like the angel in the Apocalypse, he
were standing in the sun.</q> Crane, Religion of To-morrow, 313&mdash;<q>To insure perpetual
hunger deprive a man of nutritious food, and so long as he lives he will suffer; so pain
will last so long as the soul is deprived of God, after the artificial stimulants of sin's
pleasures have lost their effect. Death has nothing to do with it; for as long as the soul
lives apart from God, whether on this or on another planet, it will be wretched. If the
unrepentant sinner is immortal, his sufferings will be immortal.</q> <q>Magnas inter opes,
inops</q>&mdash;poverty-stricken amid great riches&mdash;his very nature compels him to suffer.
Nor can he change his nature; for character, once set and hardened in this world, cannot
be cast into the melting-pot and remoulded in the world to come. The hell of
Robert G. Ingersoll is far more terrible than the orthodox hell. He declares that there
is no forgiveness and no renewal. Natural law must have its way. Man is a Mazeppa
bound to the wild horse of his passions; a Prometheus, into whose vitals remorse, like
a vulture, is ever gnawing.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) As there are degrees of human guilt, so future punishment may
admit of degrees, and yet in all those degrees be infinite in duration. The
doctrine of everlasting punishment does not imply that, at each instant of
the future existence of the lost, there is infinite pain. A line is infinite in
length, but it is far from being infinite in breadth or thickness. <q>An
infinite series may make only a finite sum; and infinite series may differ
infinitely in their total amount.</q> The Scriptures recognize such degrees
in future punishment, while at the same time they declare it to be endless
(Luke 12:47, 48; Rev. 20:12, 13).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:47, 48</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And that servant who knew his Lord's will, and made not ready, nor did according to his will
shall be beaten with many stripes; but he that knew not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
stripes</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 20:12, 13</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne; and books were
opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of the things which
were written in the books, according to their works ... judged every man according to their works.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) We know the enormity of sin only by God's own declarations with
regard to it, and by the sacrifice which he has made to redeem us from it.
As committed against an infinite God, and as having in itself infinite possibilities
of evil, it may itself be infinite, and may deserve infinite punishment.
Hell, as well as the Cross, indicates God's estimate of sin.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Ez. 14:23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>ye shall know that I have not done without cause all that I have done in it, saith the Lord
Jehovah.</hi></q> Valuable as the vine is for its fruit, it is fit only for fuel when it is barren.
Every single sin, apart from the action of divine grace, is the sign of pervading and permanent
apostasy. But there is no <emph>single</emph> sin. Sin is a germ of infinite expansion. The
single sin, left to itself, would never cease in its effects of evil,&mdash;it would dethrone God.
<q>The idea of disproportion between sin and its punishment grows out of a belittling
of sin and its guilt. One who regards murder as a slight offence will think hanging an
outrageous injustice. Theodore Parker hated the doctrine of eternal punishment,
<pb n='1051'/><anchor id='Pg1051'/>
because he considered sin as only a provocation to virtue, a step toward triumph, a fall
upwards, good in the making.</q> But it is only when we regard its relation to God that
we can estimate sin's ill desert. See Edwards the younger, Works, 1:1-294.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Shedd maintains that the guilt of sin is infinite, because it is measured, not by
the powers of the offender, but by the majesty of the God against whom it is committed;
see his Dogm. Theology, 2:740, 749&mdash;<q>Crime depends upon the object against
whom it is committed, as well as upon the subject who commits it.... To strike is a
voluntary act, but to strike a post or a stone is not a culpable act.... Killing a dog
is as bad as killing a man, if merely the subject who kills and not the object killed is
considered.... As God is infinite, offence against him is infinite in its culpability....
Any man who, in penitent faith, avails himself of the vicarious method of setting
himself right with the eternal Nemesis, will find that it succeeds; but he who rejects it
must through endless cycles grapple with the dread problem of human guilt in his own
person, and alone.</q>
</p>

<p>
Quite another view is taken by others, as for example E. G. Robinson, Christian
Theology, 292&mdash;<q>The notion that the qualities of a finite act can be infinite&mdash;that its
qualities can be derived from the person to whom the act is directed rather than from
the motives that prompt it, needs no refutation. The notion itself, one of the bastard
thoughts of mediæval metaphysical theology, has maintained its position in respectable
society solely by the services it has been regarded as capable of rendering.</q> Simon,
Reconciliation, 123&mdash;<q>To represent sins as infinite, because God against whom they are
committed is infinite, logically requires us to say that trust or reverence or love
towards God are infinite, because God is infinite.</q> We therefore regard it as more correct
to say, that sin as a finite act demands finite punishment, but as endlessly persisted
in demands an endless, and in that sense an infinite, punishment.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>E. This everlasting punishment of the wicked is not inconsistent with
God's benevolence.</head>

<p>
It is maintained, however, by many who object to
eternal retribution, that benevolence requires God not to inflict punishment
upon his creatures except as a means of attaining some higher good.
We reply:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) God is not only benevolent but holy, and holiness is his ruling
attribute. The vindication of God's holiness is the primary and sufficient
object of punishment. This constitutes a good which fully justifies the
infliction.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Even love has dignity, and rejected love may turn blessing into cursing. Love for
holiness involves hatred of unholiness. The love of God is not a love without character.
Dorner: <q>Love may not throw itself away.... We have no right to say that
punishment is just only when it is the means of amendment.</q> We must remember
that holiness conditions love (see pages 296-298). Robert Buchanan forgot God's holiness
when he wrote: <q>If there is doom for one, Thou, Maker, art undone!</q> Shakespeare,
King John, 4:3&mdash;<q>Beyond the infinite and boundless reach Of mercy, if thou
didst this deed of death, Art thou damned, Hubert!</q> Tennyson: <q>He that shuts Love
out, in turn shall be Shut out from Love, and on the threshold lie Howling in utter
darkness.</q> Theodore Parker once tried to make peace between Wendell Phillips and
Horace Mann, whom Phillips had criticized with his accustomed severity. Mann
wrote to Parker: <q>What a good man you are! I am sure nobody would be damned
if you were at the head of the universe. But,</q> he continued, <q>I will never treat a
man with respect whom I do not respect, be the consequences what they may&mdash;so
help me&mdash;Horace Mann!</q> (Chadwick, Theodore Parker, 330). The spirit which animated
Horace Mann may not have been the spirit of love, but we can imagine a case
in which his words might be the utterance of love as well as of righteousness. For love
is under law to righteousness, and only righteous love is true love.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) In this life, God's justice does involve certain of his creatures in
sufferings which are of no advantage to the individuals who suffer; as in
the case of penalties which do not reform, and of afflictions which only
harden and embitter. If this be a fact here, it may be a fact hereafter.
</p>

<pb n='1052'/><anchor id='Pg1052'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There are many sufferers on earth, in prisons and on sick-beds, whose suffering results
in hardness of heart and enmity to God. The question is not a question of quantity,
but of quality. It is a question whether any punishment at all is consistent with God's
benevolence,&mdash;any punishment, that is to say, which does not result in good to the
punished. This we maintain; and claim that God is bound to punish moral impurity,
whether any good comes therefrom to the impure or not. Archbishop Whately says it
is as difficult to change one atom of lead to silver as it is to change a whole mountain.
If the punishment of <emph>many</emph> incorrigibly impenitent persons is consistent with God's
benevolence, so is the punishment of <emph>one</emph> incorrigibly impenitent person; if the punishment
of incorrigibly impenitent persons for eternity is inconsistent with God's benevolence,
so is the punishment of such persons for a limited time, or for any time at all.
</p>

<p>
In one of his early stories William Black represents a sour-tempered Scotchman as
protesting against the idea that a sinner he has in mind should be allowed to escape the
consequences of his acts: <q>What's the good of being good,</q> he asks, <q>if things are to
turn out that way?</q> The instinct of retribution is the strongest instinct of the human
heart. It is bound up with our very intuition of God's existence, so that to deny its
rightfulness is to deny that there is a God. There is <q><hi rend='italic'>a certain fearful expectation of judgment</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:27</hi>) for ourselves and for others, in case of persistent transgression, without
which the very love of God would cease to inspire respect. Since neither annihilation
nor second probation is Scriptural, our only relief in contemplating the doctrine of
eternal punishment must come from: 1. the fact that eternity is not endless <emph>time</emph>, but
a state inconceivable to us; and 2. the fact that evolution suggests reversion to the
brute as the necessary consequence of abusing freedom.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The benevolence of God, as concerned for the general good of the
universe, requires the execution of the full penalty of the law upon all who
reject Christ's salvation. The Scriptures intimate that God's treatment of
human sin is matter of instruction to all moral beings. The self-chosen
ruin of the few may be the salvation of the many.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Dr. Joel Parker, Lectures on Universalism, speaks of the security of free creatures as
attained through a gratitude for deliverance <q>kept alive by a constant example of some
who are suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.</q> Our own race may be the only race
(of course the angels are not a <q>race</q>) that has fallen away from God. As through
the church the manifold wisdom of God is made manifest <q><hi rend='italic'>to principalities and powers in the
heavenly places</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eph. 3:10</hi>); so, through the punishment of the lost, God's holiness may be
made known to a universe that without it might have no proof so striking, that sin is
moral suicide and ruin, and that God's holiness is its irreconcilable antagonist.
</p>

<p>
With regard to the extent and scope of hell, we quote the words of Dr. Shedd, in the
book already mentioned: <q>Hell is only a spot in the universe of God. Compared with
heaven, hell is narrow and limited. The kingdom of Satan is insignificant, in contrast
with the kingdom of Christ. In the immense range of God's dominion, good is the rule
and evil is the exception. Sin is a speck upon the infinite azure of eternity; a spot on
the sun. Hell is only a corner of the universe. The Gothic etymon denotes a covered-up
hole. In Scripture, hell is a <q><hi rend='italic'>pit</hi>,</q> a <q><hi rend='italic'>lake</hi></q>; not an ocean. It is <q><hi rend='italic'>bottomless</hi>,</q> not boundless.
The Gnostic and Dualistic theories which make God, and Satan or the Demiurge, nearly
equal in power and dominion, find no support in Revelation. The Bible teaches that
there will always be some sin and death in the universe. Some angels and men will
forever be the enemies of God. But their number, compared with that of unfallen
angels and redeemed men, is small. They are not described in the glowing language and
metaphors by which the immensity of the holy and blessed is delineated (<hi rend='italic'>Ps. 68:17</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Deut.
32:2</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Ps. 103:21</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 6:13</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 15:25</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Rev. 14:1</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>21:16, 24, 25</hi>.) The number of the lost spirits
is never thus emphasized and enlarged upon. The brief, stern statement is, that <q><hi rend='italic'>the
fearful and unbelieving ... their part shall be in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rev. 21:8</hi>).
No metaphors and amplifications are added to make the impression of an immense
<q><hi rend='italic'>multitude which no man can number</hi>.</q></q> Dr. Hodge: <q>We have reason to believe that the lost
will bear to the saved no greater proportion than the inmates of a prison do to the mass
of a community.</q>
</p>

<p>
The North American Review engaged Dr. Shedd to write an article vindicating eternal
punishment, and also engaged Henry Ward Beecher to answer it. The proof sheets
of Dr. Shedd's article were sent to Mr. Beecher, whereupon he telegraphed from Denver
<pb n='1053'/><anchor id='Pg1053'/>
to the Review: <q>Cancel engagement, Shedd is too much for me. I half believe in
eternal punishment now myself. Get somebody else.</q> The article in reply was never
written, and Dr. Shedd remained unanswered.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The present existence of sin and punishment is commonly admitted
to be in some way consistent with God's benevolence, in that it is made the
means of revealing God's justice and mercy. If the temporary existence of
sin and punishment lead to good, it is entirely possible that their eternal
existence may lead to yet greater good.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>A priori</foreign>, we should have thought it impossible for God to permit moral evil,&mdash;heathenism,
prostitution, the saloon, the African slave-trade. But sin is a fact. Who
can say how long it will be a fact? Why not forever? The benevolence that permits
it now may permit it through eternity. And yet, if permitted through eternity, it can
be made harmless only by visiting it with eternal punishment. Lillie on Thessalonians,
457&mdash;<q>If the temporary existence of sin and punishment lead to good, how can we
prove that their eternal existence may not lead to greater good?</q> We need not deny
that it causes God real sorrow to banish the lost. Christ's weeping over Jerusalem
expresses the feelings of God's heart: <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 23:37, 38</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killeth the
prophets, and stoneth them that are sent unto her! how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a
hen gathered her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Hosea 11:8</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I cast thee off, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah?
how shall I set thee as Zeboiim? my heart is turned within me, my compassions are kindled together.</hi></q> Dante,
Hell, iii&mdash;the inscription over the gate of Hell: <q>Justice the founder of my fabric
moved; To rear me was the task of power divine, Supremest wisdom and primeval
love.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. H. Bradford, Age of Faith, 254, 267&mdash;<q>If one thinks of the Deity as an austere
monarch, having a care for his own honor but none for those to whom he has given
being, optimism is impossible. For what shall we say of our loved ones who have
committed sins? That splendid boy who yielded to an inherited tendency&mdash;what has
become of him? Those millions who with little light and mighty passions have gone
wrong&mdash;what of them? Those countless myriads who peopled the earth in ages past
and had no clear motive to righteousness, since their perception of God was dim&mdash;is
this all that can be said of them: In torment they are exhibiting the glorious holiness
of the Almighty in his hatred of sin? Some may believe that, but, thank God, the number
is not large.... No, penalty, remorse, despair, are only signs of the deep remedial
force in the nature of things, which has always been at work and always will be,
and which, unless counteracted, will result sometime in universal and immortal
harmony.... Retribution is a natural law; it is universal in its sweep; it is at the same
time a manifestation of the beneficence that pervades the universe. This law must
continue its operation so long as one free agent violates the moral order. Neither justice
nor love would be honored if one soul were allowed to escape the action of that
law. But the sting in retribution is ordained to be remedial and restorative rather than
punitive and vengeful.... Will any forever resist that discipline? We know not; but
it is difficult to understand how any can be willing to do so, when the fulness of the
divine glory is revealed.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) As benevolence in God seems in the beginning to have permitted
moral evil, not because sin was desirable in itself, but only because it was
incident to a system which provided for the highest possible freedom and
holiness in the creature; so benevolence in God may to the end permit the
existence of sin and may continue to punish the sinner, undesirable as these
things are in themselves, because they are incidents of a system which provides
for the highest possible freedom and holiness in the creature through
eternity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
But the condition of the lost is only made more hopeless by the difficulty with which
God brings himself to this, his <q><hi rend='italic'>strange work</hi></q> of punishment (<hi rend='italic'>Is. 28:21</hi>). The sentence
which the judge pronounces with tears is indicative of a tender and suffering heart, but
it also indicates that there can be no recall. By the very exhibition of <q><hi rend='italic'>eternal judgment</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Heb. 6:2</hi>), not only may a greater number be kept true to God, but a higher degree of
<pb n='1054'/><anchor id='Pg1054'/>
holiness among that number be forever assured. The Endless Future, published by
South. Meth. Pub. House, supposes the universe yet in its infancy, an eternal liability
to rebellion, an ever-growing creation kept from sin by one example of punishment.
<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 7:13, 14</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>few there be that find it</hi></q>&mdash;<q>seems to have been intended to describe the conduct
of men then living, rather than to foreshadow the two opposite currents of human
life to the end of time</q>; see Hovey, Bib. Eschatology, 167. See Goulburn, Everlasting
Punishment; Haley, The Hereafter of Sin.
</p>

<p>
A. H. Bradford, Age of Faith, 239, mentions as causes for the modification of view as
to everlasting punishment: 1. Increased freedom in expression of convictions; 2.
Interpretation of the word <q>eternal</q>; 3. The doctrine of the immanence of God,&mdash;if
God is in every man, then he cannot everlastingly hate himself, even in the poor manifestation
of himself in a human creature; 4. The influence of the poets, Burns, Browning,
Tennyson, and Whittier. Whittier, Eternal Goodness: <q>The wrong that pains my
soul below, I dare not throne above: I know not of his hate,&mdash;I know His goodness
and his love.</q> We regard Dr. Bradford as the most plausible advocate of restoration.
But his view is vitiated by certain untenable theological presuppositions: 1. that righteousness
is only a form of love; 2. that righteousness, apart from love, is passionate
and vengeful; 3. that man's freedom is incapable of endless abuse; 4. that not all
men here have a fair probation; 5. that the amount of light against which they sin is
not taken into consideration by God; 6. that the immanence of God does not leave
room for free human action; 7. that God's object in his administration is, not to reveal
his whole character, and chiefly his holiness, but solely to reveal his love; 8. that the
declarations of Scripture with regard to <q><hi rend='italic'>an eternal sin</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Mark 3:29</hi>), <q><hi rend='italic'>eternal punishment</hi></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Mat. 25:46</hi>), <q><hi rend='italic'>eternal destruction</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>2 Thess. 1:9</hi>), still permit us to believe in the restoration of
all men to holiness and likeness to God.
</p>

<p>
We regard as more Scriptural and more rational the view of Max Müller, the distinguished
Oxford philologist: <q>I have always held that this would be a miserable universe
without eternal punishment. Every act, good or evil, must carry its consequences,
and the fact that our punishment will go on forever seems to me a proof of the everlasting
love of God. For an evil deed to go unpunished would be to destroy the moral
order of the universe.</q> Max Müller simply expresses the ineradicable conviction of
mankind that retribution must follow sin; that God must show his disapproval of sin
by punishment; that the very laws of man's nature express in this way God's righteousness;
that the abolition of this order would be the dethronement of God and the
destruction of the universe.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>F. The proper preaching of the doctrine of everlasting punishment is
not a hindrance to the success of the gospel.</head>

<p>
The proper preaching of the doctrine of everlasting punishment is
not a hindrance to the success of the gospel, but is one of its chief and
indispensable auxiliaries.&mdash;It is maintained by some, however, that, because
men are naturally repelled by it, it cannot be a part of the preacher's
message. We reply:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) If the doctrine be true, and clearly taught in Scripture, no fear of
consequences to ourselves or to others can absolve us from the duty of
preaching it. The minister of Christ is under obligation to preach the
whole truth of God; if he does this, God will care for the results.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ez. 2:7</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear</hi></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>3:10, 11, 18, 19</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, all my words that I shall speak unto thee receive in thine
heart, and hear with thine ears. And go, get thee to them of the captivity, unto the children of thy people, and speak
unto them, and tell them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear....
When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked
from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at
thy hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die
in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
The old French Protestant church had as a coat of arms the device of an anvil, around
which were many broken hammers, with this motto: <q>Hammer away, ye hostile
bands; Your hammers break, God's anvil stands.</q> St. Jerome: <q>If an offence come
out of the truth, better is it that the offence come, than that the truth be concealed.</q>
Shedd, Dogm. Theology, 2:680&mdash;<q>Jesus Christ is the Person responsible for the doctrine
of eternal perdition.</q> The most fearful utterances with regard to future punishment
<pb n='1055'/><anchor id='Pg1055'/>
are those of Jesus himself, as for example, <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 23:33</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Ye serpents, ye offspring of vipers,
how shall ye escape the judgment of hell?</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>Mark 3:29</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit hath
never forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Mat. 10:28</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>be not afraid of them that kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>25:46</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>these
shall go away into eternal punishment.</hi></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) All preaching which ignores the doctrine of eternal punishment just
so far lowers the holiness of God, of which eternal punishment is an expression,
and degrades the work of Christ, which was needful to save us from
it. The success of such preaching can be but temporary, and must be followed
by a disastrous reaction toward rationalism and immorality.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Much apostasy from the faith begins with refusal to accept the doctrine of eternal
punishment. Theodore Parker, while he acknowledged that the doctrine was taught
in the New Testament, rejected it, and came at last to say of the whole theology which
includes this idea of endless punishment, that it <q>sneers at common sense, spits upon
reason, and makes God a devil.</q>
</p>

<p>
But, if there be no eternal punishment, then man's danger was not great enough to
require an infinite sacrifice; and we are compelled to give up the doctrine of atonement.
If there were no atonement, there was no need that man's Savior should himself be more
than man; and we are compelled to give up the doctrine of the deity of Christ, and with
this that of the Trinity. If punishment be not eternal, then God's holiness is but another
name for benevolence; all proper foundation for morality is gone, and God's law ceases
to inspire reverence and awe. If punishment be not eternal, then the Scripture writers
who believed and taught this were fallible men who were not above the prejudices and
errors of their times; and we lose all evidence of the divine inspiration of the Bible.
With this goes the doctrine of miracles; God is identified with nature, and becomes the
impersonal God of pantheism.
</p>

<p>
Theodore Parker passed through this process, and so did Francis W. Newman. Logically,
every one who denies the everlasting punishment of the wicked ought to reach a
like result; and we need only a superficial observation of countries like India, where
pantheism is rife, to see how deplorable is the result in the decline of public and of
private virtue. Emory Storrs: <q>When hell drops out of religion, justice drops out of
politics.</q> The preacher who talks lightly of sin and punishment does a work strikingly
analogous to that of Satan, when he told Eve: <q><hi rend='italic'>Ye shall not surely die</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Gen. 3:4</hi>). Such a
preacher lets men go on what Shakespeare calls <q>the primrose way to the everlasting
bonfire</q> (Macbeth, 2:3).
</p>

<p>
Shedd, Dogm. Theology, 2:671&mdash;<q>Vicarious atonement is incompatible with universal
salvation. The latter doctrine implies that suffering for sin is remedial only, while the
former implies that it is retribution.... If the sinner himself is not obliged by justice
to suffer in order to satisfy the law he has violated, then certainly no one needs suffer
for him for this purpose.</q> Sonnet by Michael Angelo: <q>Now hath my life across a
stormy sea Like a frail bark reached that wide port where all Are bidden, ere the final
reckoning fall Of good and evil for eternity. Now know I well how that fond fantasy,
Which made my soul the worshiper and thrall Of earthly art, is vain; how criminal Is
that which all men seek unwillingly. Those amorous thoughts that were so lightly
dressed&mdash;What are they when the double death is nigh? The one I know for sure, the
other dread. Painting nor sculpture now can lull to rest My soul that turns to his great
Love on high, Whose arms, to clasp us, on the Cross were spread.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The fear of future punishment, though not the highest motive, is
yet a proper motive, for the renunciation of sin and the turning to Christ.
It must therefore be appealed to, in the hope that the seeking of salvation
which begins in fear of God's anger may end in the service of faith and love.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Luke 12:4, 5</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no
more that they can do. But I will warn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, who after he hath killed hath power to
cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>Jude 23</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>and some save, snatching them out of the fire.</hi></q> It is
noteworthy that the Old Testament, which is sometimes regarded, though incorrectly,
as a teacher of fear, has no such revelations of hell as are found in the New. Only
when God's mercy was displayed in the Cross were there opened to men's view the
<pb n='1056'/><anchor id='Pg1056'/>
depths of the abyss from which the Cross was to save them. And, as we have already
seen, it is not Peter or Paul, but our Lord himself, who gives the most fearful descriptions
of the suffering of the lost, and the clearest assertions of its eternal duration.
</p>

<p>
Michael Angelo's picture of the Last Judgment is needed to prepare us for Raphael's
picture of the Transfiguration. Shedd, Dogm. Theology, 2:752&mdash;<q>What the human race
needs is to go to the divine Confessional.... Confession is the only way to light and
peace.... The denial of moral evil is the secret of the murmuring and melancholy
with which so much of modern letters is filled.</q> Matthew Arnold said to his critics:
<q>Non me tua fervida terrent dicta; Dii me terrent et Jupiter hostis</q>&mdash;<q>I am
not afraid of your violent judgments; I fear only God and his anger.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Heb. 10:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.</hi></q> Daniel Webster said: <q>I want a minister
to drive me into a corner of the pew, and make me feel that the devil is after me.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) In preaching this doctrine, while we grant that the material images
used in Scripture to set forth the sufferings of the lost are to be spiritually
and not literally interpreted, we should still insist that the misery of the
soul which eternally hates God is greater than the physical pains which are
used to symbolize it. Although a hard and mechanical statement of the
truth may only awaken opposition, a solemn and feeling presentation of it
upon proper occasions, and in its due relation to the work of Christ and the
offers of the gospel, cannot fail to accomplish God's purpose in preaching,
and to be the means of saving some who hear.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Acts 20:31</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Wherefore watch ye, remembering that by the space of three years I ceased not to admonish every
one night and day with tears</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>2 Cor. 2:14-17</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>But thanks be unto God, who always leadeth us in triumph in
Christ, and maketh manifest through us the savor of his knowledge in every place. For we are a sweet savor of Christ
unto God, in them that are being saved, and in them that are perishing; to the one a savor from death unto death; to
the other a savor from life unto life. And who is sufficient for these things? For we are not as the many, corrupting
the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, speak we in Christ</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>5:11</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Knowing therefore
the fear of the Lord, we persuade men, but we are made manifest unto God; and I hope that we are made manifest
also in your consciences</hi></q>; <hi rend='italic'>1 Tim. 4:16</hi>&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Take heed to thyself and to thy teaching. Continue in these things; for
in doing this thou shalt save both thyself and them that hear thee.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Omne simile claudicat</q> as well as <q>volat</q>&mdash;<q>Every simile halts as well as flies.</q>
No symbol expresses all the truth. Yet we need to use symbols, and the Holy Spirit
honors our use of them. It is <q><hi rend='italic'>God's good pleasure through the foolishness of the preaching to save them
that believe</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 1:21</hi>). It was a deep sense of his responsibility for men's souls that
moved Paul to say: <q><hi rend='italic'>woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel</hi></q> (<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 9:16</hi>). And it was a deep
sense of duty fulfilled that enabled George Fox, when he was dying, to say: <q>I am
clear! I am clear!</q>
</p>

<p>
So Richard Baxter wrote: <q>I preached as never sure to preach again. And as a dying
man to dying men.</q> It was Robert McCheyne who said that the preacher ought never
to speak of everlasting punishment without tears. McCheyne's tearful preaching of it
prevailed upon many to break from their sins and to accept the pardon and renewal
that are offered in Christ. Such preaching of judgment and punishment were never
needed more than now, when lax and unscriptural views with regard to law and sin
break the force of the preacher's appeals. Let there be such preaching, and then many
a hearer will utter the thought, if not the words, of the Dies Iræ, 8-10&mdash;<q>Rex tremendæ
majestatis, Qui salvandos salvas gratis, Salva me, fons pietatis. Recordare, Jesu pie,
Quod sum causa tuæ viæ: Ne me perdas ilia die. Quærens me sedisti lassus, Redemisti
crucem passus: Tautus labor non sit cassus.</q> See Edwards, Works, 4:226-321; Hodge,
Outlines of Theology, 459-468; Murphy, Scientific Bases of Faith, 310, 319, 464; Dexter,
Verdict of Reason; George, Universalism not of the Bible; Angus, Future Punishment;
Jackson, Bampton Lectures for 1875, on the Doctrine of Retribution; Shedd, Doctrine
of Endless Punishment, preface, and Dogm. Theol., 2:667-754.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='1057'/><anchor id='Pg1057'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Indexes.</head>

<p>
The author acknowledges his great indebtness to the Reverend
Robert Kerr Eccles, M. D., of Lemoore, California, for the preparation
of the exceedingly full and valuable Indexes which
follow, and a similar obligation to Mr. Herman K. Phinney,
Assistant Librarian of the University of Rochester, for his care in
the proof-reading of the whole work.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index Of Subjects.</head>

<pb n='1059'/><anchor id='Pg1059'/>

<lg>
<l>Ability, gracious, 602, 640</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>natural, of New School, 640, 641</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not test of sin, 558</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pelagian, 640</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abiogenesis, 389</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Absolute, its denotation, 9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as applied to divine attributes, 249</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how related to finite, 58, 255</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reason, an, the postulate of logical thought, 60</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abydos, triad of, 351</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Acceptilatio</hi>, the Grotian, 740</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acquittal of believing sinners, from punishment, 854</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Action, divine, not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in distantia</foreign>, 418</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acts, evil, God's concurrence with, 418</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ad aperturam libri</hi>, 32</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adam, his original righteousness not immutable, 519</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had power of contrary choice, 519</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not created undecided, 519</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his love, God-given, 519</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his exercise of holy will not meritorious, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unfallen, according to Romish theologians, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his physical perfection, 523</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unfallen, according to Fathers and Scholastics, 523</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relations to lower creation, 524</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relations to God, 524</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his surroundings and society, 525</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the test of his virtue, 526</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>physical immortality possible to, 527</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Fall, see <ref target='Index-Fall'>Fall</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his twofold death, resulting from Fall, 590</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his communion with God interrupted, 592</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his banishment from God, 593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imputation of his sin to his posterity, see <ref target='Index-Imputation'>Imputation</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in him <q>the natural,</q> had he continued upright, might without death have obtained <q>the spiritual,</q> 658</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>was Christ in, 759</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ, the Last, 678</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ, the Second, 680</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adoption, what?, 857</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Aequale temperamentum</hi>, 523</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Affections, 362, 815</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holy, authors on, 826</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agency, free, and divine decrees, 359-362</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander, unifier of Greek East, 668</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allegorical arrangement in theology, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Allœosis</foreign>, 686</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Altruism, 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambition, what? 569</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>American theology, 48, 49</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Anacoloutha</hi>, Paul's, 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Analytical method, in theology, 45, 49</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestry of race, proofs of a common, 476-482</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Angel of the church,</q> 452, 916</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Angel of Jehovah,</q> 319</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angelology of Scripture, not derived from Egyptian or Persian sources, 448</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Angels' food,</q> 445</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angels, their class defined, 443</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scholastic subtleties regarding, their influence, 443, 444</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Milton and Dante upon, 443</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their existence a scientific possibility, 444</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>faith in, enlarges conception of universe, 444</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>list of authors upon, 444</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scriptural statements and intimations concerning, 441-459</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>are created beings, 444</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>are incorporeal, 445</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>are personal, 445</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possessed of superhuman intelligence, 445</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinct from and older than man, 445</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not personifications, 445</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>numerous, 447</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>are a company, not a race, 447</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>were created holy, 450</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had a probation, 450</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some preserved their integrity, 450</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some fell from innocence, 450</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the good, confirmed in goodness, 450</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the evil, confirmed in evil, 450</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angels, good, they stand worshiping God, 451</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>they rejoice in God's works, 451</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>they work in nature, 451</l>
<pb n='1060'/><anchor id='Pg1060'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>they guide nations, 451</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>watch over interests of churches, 452</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assist individual believers, 452</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>punish God's enemies, 452</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ministers of God's special providences, 452</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>act within laws of spiritual and moral world, 453</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their influence illustrated by psychic phenomena, 453, 454</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Angels-Evil'/>
<l>Angels, evil, oppose God, 454</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hinder man's welfare, 455</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tempt negatively and positively, 455</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their intercourse with Christ, 456</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>execute God's will, 457</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their power not independent of human will, 457</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>limited by permissive will of God, 458</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the doctrine of, not opposed to science, 459</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not opposed to right views of space or spirit, 459</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not impossible that, though wise, they should rebel, 460</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the continuance and punishment of evil, not inconsistent with divine benevolence, 461</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their organization, though sinful, not impossible, 461</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the doctrine of evil, not hurtful, 461, 462</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the doctrine of evil, does not degrade man, 462</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>good, the doctrine of, its uses, 462</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evil, the doctrine of, its uses, 463</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fallen, if no redemption provided for, why? 463</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>created in Christ, 464</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their salvation, Scripture silent upon, 464</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anger, sometimes a duty, 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annihilation, of infants, held by Emmons, 609</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at death, inequitable, 987, 1036</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disproved by Scripture, 991-998</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>terms which seemingly teach, 993</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>language adduced to prove, often metaphorical, 994</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>old view of, 1036</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the theory that it is a result of the weakening of powers of soul by sin, considered, 1036</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>second death</q> regarded as dissolution of the soul, 1036</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the theory that a positive punishment proportioned to guilt precedes and ends in, 1037</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the tenet of, rests on a defective view of holiness, 1037</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a part of the <q>conditional immortality</q> hypothesis, 1037</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as connected with the principle,
<q>Evil is punished by its own increase,</q> 1038</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annihilationists, 487</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Answer (Interrogation) of a good conscience,</q> phrase examined, 821</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthropological argument for God's existence, 80-85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthropological method in theology, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthropology, a division of theology, 464</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthropomorphism, 122, 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Anthropomorphism inverse,</q> 468</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antichrist, 1009</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Anticipative consequences,</q> 403, 658</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antinomianism, 875</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antiquity of race, relation of Scripture to, 224-226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apocalypse, its exegetic not yet found, 1014</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apocrypha, 115, 150, 865</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollinarianism, 487, 670, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostasy, man's state of, 533-664</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostasy of the believer, how treated in Scripture, 884-886</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>A posteriori</foreign> reasoning, 66, 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostles, 199-201, 909, 971</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Apotelesmaticum genus</hi>, 686</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>A priori</foreign> argument for God's existence, the, see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>judgments, 10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reasons for expecting a divine revelation, 111-114</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Arbitrium</hi>, 557</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argument <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad hominem</foreign> in Scripture, 233</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for existence of God, its value, 65-67, 71, 72, 87-89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arianism, 328-330, 670</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arminianism, 362, 601-606</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arrangement of material in theology, 2, 49, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Art, 529, 1016</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryan and Semitic languages, their connection, 479</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ascension, Christ's, 708-710</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ's humanity, how related to the Logos in, 709</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aseity of God, 256, 257</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not confined to Father, 342</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Assensus</foreign>, an element in faith, 837</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assurance of salvation, 808, 845</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Asymptote of God,</q> man, the, 565</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athanasian Creed, 329</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atoms, 96, 374</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atomism, 600, 635</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Atonement'/>
<l>Atonement, facts in Christ's sufferings which prove, 713</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 713</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>satisfies holiness, the fundamental attribute of God, 713</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meets the conditions of a universe in which happiness is connected with righteousness and suffering with sin, 714</l>
<pb n='1061'/><anchor id='Pg1061'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in it Christ as Logos, the Revealer of God in the universe, inflicts the penalty of sin, while, as Life of humanity, he endures the infliction, 714</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>humanity has made, when righteousness in Christ, as generic humanity, condemns sin, and love in Christ endures the penalty, 714</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>substitutionary and sharing, 715</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in, Christ suffers as the very life of man, 715</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not made, but revealed, by Christ's historical sufferings, 715</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sacrifice of, the final revelation of the heart of God and of the law of universal life, 716</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a model of, and stimulus to, self-sacrifice, 716</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its subjective effects must not exclude consideration of its ground and cause, 716</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scripture methods of representing, 716-722</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>originates in God's love and manifests it, 716</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an example of disinterested love to secure our deliverance from selfishness, 716, 717</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a ransom in which death is the price paid, 717</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an act of obedience to law, 717</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an act of priestly mediation, 718-728</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a sin-offering, 719</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a propitiation, 719</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a substitution, 720</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>correct views of, grounded on proper interpretation of the institution of sacrifice, 721</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is it to be interpreted according to notions derived from Jewish or heathen sacrifices? 728</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theories of, 728-766</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Socinian (example) theory, 728, 729</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objections to above, 735-740</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bushnellian (moral influence) theory, 733-735</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objections to above, 735-740</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Grotian (governmental) theory of, 740, 741</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Irvingian (gradually extirpated depravity) theory of, 744, 745</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objections to theory, 745-747</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anselmic (commercial) theory of, 747, 748</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Military theory of, 747</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objections to, 748-750</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Criminal theory of, 748</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Ethical theory of, 750-771</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a true theory of, resolves two problems, 750, 751</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grounded in holiness of God, 751</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a satisfaction of an ethical demand of the divine nature, 751, 752, 753</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>substitution in, an operation of grace, 752</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the righteousness of law maintained in, 752</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>maintains, as a first subordinate result, the interests of the divine government, 753</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>provides, as a second subordinate result, for the needs of human nature, 753</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the classical passage with reference to, 753</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sets forth Christ as so related to humanity that he is under obligation to pay and does pay, 754</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explains how the innocent can suffer for the guilty in, 755, 756, 757</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Andover theory of, 756</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by one whose nature was purified, but his obligation to suffer undiminished, 757</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the guilt resting on Christ in, what it was, 645, 646, 757</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a member of the race, did he not suffer in, for his own sin?, 758</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>showed what had been in the heart of God from eternity, 758</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explanations of Christ's identification with humanity as a reason why he made, 759-761</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exposition of 2 Cor. 5:21, 760</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grounded in the holiness and love of God, 761</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is accomplished through the solidarity of the race, and Christ the common life, bearing guilt for men, 761</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ground of, on the part of man, 761</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rather revealed than made by incarnate Christ, 762, 763</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ethical theory of, philosophically correct, 764</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>combines the valuable elements of other theories, 764</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shows most satisfactorily how demands of holiness are met, 764</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents only explanation of sacrificial rites and language, 765</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alone gives proper place to death of Christ, 765</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is best explanation of sufferings of Christ, 765</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>satisfies most completely the ethical demand of human nature, 765, 766</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, as inconsistent with God's omnipotence or love, 766</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, as presented ideas mutually exclusive, 767</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, as obviating real propitiation, 768</l>
<pb n='1062'/><anchor id='Pg1062'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, as an act of injustice, 768</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, because transfer of punishment is impossible, 768, 769</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, because the remorse implied in it, was impossible to Christ, 769</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, because sufferings finite in time cannot satisfy infinite demands of law, 769, 770</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, that it renders Christ's active obedience superfluous, 770</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, as immoral in tendency, 770</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, as requiring faith to complete a satisfaction which ought to be itself perfect, 771</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extent of, 771-773</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unlimited, 771</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its application limited, 771</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passages asserting its special efficacy, 771</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passages asserting its sufficiency for all, 771</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secures for all men delay in execution of sentence against sin, 772</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has made objective provision for all, 772, 773</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has procured for all incentives to repentance, 773</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>limited, advocates of, 773</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>universal, advocates of, 773</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attributes, divine, see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mental, higher than those of matter, inference from, 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aurignac Cave, its evidence doubtful, 532</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australian languages, their affinities, 479</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Automatic, mental activity largely, 550</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Automatic excellence or badness,</q> 611</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avarice, defined, 569</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avatars, Hindu, 187</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ's incarnation unlike, 698</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ayat</hi> of Koran, 213</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baalim, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balaam, inspired, yet unholy, 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Baptism-Lords-Supper'/>
<l>Baptism and Lord's Supper, only accounted for as monuments, 157</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the formula of, correlates Christ's name with God's, 312</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>according to Romish church, 522</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Jesus, its import, 761, 762, 942</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christian, definition of, 931</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instituted by Christ, 931</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of universal and perpetual obligation, 931</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ignored by Salvation Army and Society of Friends, 931</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>John's recognized by Christ, 931, 932</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>John's, was it a modification of a previously existing rite?, 931, 932</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proselyte, its existence discussed, 931, 932</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>John's, essentially Christian baptism, 732</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made the law of the church, 932</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christian, complementally related to Lord's Supper, is of equal permanency, 932, 933</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its mode, immersion, 933</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meaning of its original word, according to Greek usage, 933, 934</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meaning of original word as determined by contextual relation, 934</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meaning of original word determined by voice used with 'water,', 935</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meaning of original word determined by prepositional connections, 935</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meaning of original word derived from circumstances, 935</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>original meaning of word determined from figurative allusions, 936</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>original meaning of word determined by practice of early church, 936</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>occasional change in its mode permitted for seeming sufficient reason at an early date, 936</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>original meaning of word determined by usage of Greek church, 937, 938</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dr. Dods' statement as to its mode, 938</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>concession to its original method of observance in the introduction of baptisteries or <q>fontgraves</q> into non Baptist places of worship, 938</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the church, being only an executive body, cannot modify Christ's law concerning, 939</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the law of, fundamental, and therefore unalterable save by Legislator himself, 939</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>any modification of, by church, implies unwisdom in Appointer of rite, 939</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>any change in mode vacates ordinance of its symbolic significance, 939</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objections to its mode, immersion, 940</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if its mode impracticable, ordinance not a duty, 940</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when its mode dangerous, ordinance not to be performed, 940</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the mode of baptism decently impressive, 940</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ordinance symbolizing suffering and death is consistently somewhat inconvenient, 940</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's blessing on an irregular administration of, no sanction of irregularity, 940</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its symbolism, 940-945</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what it symbolizes is general, 940</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes death and burial of Christ, 940</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes union with Christ, 941</l>
<pb n='1063'/><anchor id='Pg1063'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes atonement and redemption, 941</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes to the believer being baptized his spiritual death and resurrection, 941</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes union of believers with each other, 942</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes the death and resurrection of the body, 942</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the central truth, set forth by, 942</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a correlative truth set forth by, 943</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sets forth purification through communion with death of Christ, 944</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>symbolizes regenerating power of Jesus' death, 944</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>immersion in, alone symbolizes the passage from death unto life in regeneration and communion with Christ in his death and rising, 944</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the substituting for the correct mode of, one which excludes all reference to Christ's death destroys the ordinance, 944</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a historical monument, 945</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a pictorial expression of doctrine, 945</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Lord's Supper, 945</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subjects of, 945-959</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the proper subjects of, 945</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>those only to be baptized who have first been made disciples, 945</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>those only to be baptized who have repented and believed, 945</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>those only to be baptized who can be members of the church, 945</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>those only to be baptized for whom the symbolism is valid, 946</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a means of regeneration, 946</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the spiritual and the ritual so combined in, that the whole ordinance may be designated by its outward aspect, 946</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a being <q>born of water,</q> 946</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>connected with repentance <q>for the remission of sins,</q>, 946</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>without baptism, discipleship incomplete, and ineffective, 947</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the teachings of Campbellism regarding, 947, 948</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>act of person baptized, 948</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>before it is administered, church should require evidence that candidates are regenerated, 949</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incorrectly called <q>door into the church,</q>, 949</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as expressive of inward character of candidate, 950</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as regeneration is once for all, baptism must not be repeated, 950</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as outward expression of inward change, is the first of all duties, 950</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>should follow regeneration with least possible delay, 950</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if an actual profession of faith, not to be repeated, 950</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accessories to, matters of individual judgment, 951</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its formula, 951</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Infant, 951-959</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>without warrant in scripture, 951</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has no express command, 951</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no clear example, 951</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passages held to imply it, have no reference thereto, 951</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expressly contradicted, 952</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in it the prerequisites of faith and repentance impossible, 952</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in it the symbolism of baptism has lost significance, 952</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its practice inconsistent with constitution of the church, 952</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is unharmonious with prerequisites to the Lord's Supper, 952</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has led in Greek Church to infant communion, 953</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>denied by the Paulicians, 953</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the reasons of its rise and spread, 953</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a necessary concomitant of a State Church, 954</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founded on unscriptural and dangerous reasonings, 954</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it assumes power of church to tamper with Christ's commands, 954</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contradicts New Testament ideas of church, 954</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assumes a connection of parent and child closer and more influential than facts of Scripture and experience will support, 954, 955</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its propriety urged on various unsettled grounds, 956</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does it make its subjects members of the church?, 956</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its evil effects, 957-959</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forestalls any voluntary act, 957</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>induces superstitious confidence, 957</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has led to baptism of irrational and material things, 957</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has obscured and corrupted Christian truth, 958</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is often an obstacle to evangelical views, 958</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>merges church in nation and world, 958</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>substitutes for Christ's command an invention of men, 958, 959</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>literature concerning, 959</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptismal Regeneration, 820-822, 946, 947</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>literature upon, 948</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptist Theology, 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptists, English, 972, 977</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Free Will, 972, 977, 979</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1064'/><anchor id='Pg1064'/>

<lg>
<l>Believers, and the <q>old man,</q>, 870</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Intermediate State, 998, 999</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bewusstsein</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Gottesbewusstsein</hi>, 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bible, see <ref target='Index-Scripture'>Scripture</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bishop, office of, early made sole interpreter of apostles, 912</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in his progress from <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primus inter pares</foreign> to Christ's vicegerent, 912</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordaining, his qualifications in Episcopal church, 913</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>presbyter</q> and <q>pastor</q> designate same order, 914, 915</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the duties of, 916, 917</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordination of, 918-924</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blessedness, what?, 265</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contrasted with glory, 265</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bodies, new, of saints, are confined to space, 1032</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Body, image of God, mediately or <hi rend='italic'>significative</hi>, 523</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>honorable, 488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suggestions as to reason why given, 488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>immortality of, sought by Egyptians, 995</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not indispensable to activity and consciousness, 1000</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spiritual, what it imports, 1016, 1021-1023</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resurrection of, see <ref target='Index-Resurrection'>Resurrection</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>same, though changed annually, 1020</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a <q>flowing organism,</q>, 1021</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to regard it as a normal part of man's being, Scriptural and philosophical, 1021, 1022</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Bond servant of sin,</q> what?, 509, 510</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book may be called by name of chief author, 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of Mormon, 141</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Enoch, 165</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Judges, 166, 171</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Law, its finding, 167</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Books of O. T. quoted by Jesus, 199</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of N. T. received and used, in 2d century, 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahma, 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahmanism, 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bread, in Lord's Supper, its significance, 963</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of life, 963</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brethren, Plymouth, 895, 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bride catching, not primeval, 528</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Brimstone and fire,</q> sin and conscience, 1049</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brute, conscious but not self conscious, 252, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot objectify self, 252, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is determined from without, 252, 468</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>none ever thought 'I,' 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has not apperception, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has no concepts, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has no language, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forms no judgments, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not associate ideas by similarity, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot reason, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has no general ideas, 468</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has no conscience, 468</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has no religious nature, 468</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man came not <emph>from</emph> the, but <emph>through</emph> the, 467</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddha, 181, 182, 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddhism, its grain of truth, 181</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a missionary religion, 181</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its universalism, 181</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its altruism, 181</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its atheism, 182</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its fatalism, 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Buncombe,</q> 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burial of food and weapons with the dead body, why practiced by some races, 532</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burnt offering, its significance, 726</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byzantine and Italian artists differ in their pictures of Jesus Christ, 678</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cæsar, writes in the third person, 151</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unifier of the Latin West, 566</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his words on passing the Rubicon, 1032</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Caged eagle theory</q> of man's life, 560</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caiaphas, inspired yet unholy, 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cain, 477</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calixtus, his analytic method in systematic theology, 45, 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Call to ministry, 919</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calling, efficacious, 777, 782, 790, 791, 793, 794</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>general or external, 791</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is general, sincere?, 791, 792</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calvinism, in history, 368</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calvinistic and Arminian views, their approximation, 362, 368</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambridge Platform, 923</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Carnal mind,</q> its meaning, 562</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carthage, Council of (397), and Epistle to the Hebrews, 152</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Synod of (412), and Pelagius, 597</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caste, what?, 181</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Buddhism, 181</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Christianity, 898</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Casualism, 427, 428</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Casuistry, non scriptural, 648</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catacombs, 191</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catechism, Roman, on <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>originalis justitiæ donum additum</foreign>, 522</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Westminster Assembly's, on Infant Baptism, 957</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Causality, its law, 73</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not require a first cause, 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cause and effect, simultaneity of, 793</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cause, equivalent to 'requisite,', 44</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>formal, 44</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>material, 44</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>efficient, 44</l>
<pb n='1065'/><anchor id='Pg1065'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>final, 44</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>can an infinite, be inferred from a finite universe? 79</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when the efficient, gives place to the final? 125</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>various definitions of, 814, 815</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Causes, Aristotle's four, 44</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an infinite series of, does not require a cause of itself, 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celsus, derides the same religion for many peoples, 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Certainty not necessity, 362</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chalcedon (451) Symbol, on Mary as 'mother of God,' 671, 686</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>condemned Eutychianism, 672</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>promulgated orthodox doctrine as to the Person of Christ,   673</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its formula negative with a single exception, 673</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chance as a name for ignorance, term allowable, 428</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as implying absence of causal connection in phenomena, not allowable, 428</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as undesigning cause, insufficient, 428</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Change, orderly, requires intelligent cause, 75</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Character, helped by systematic truth, 16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>changed rather than expressed by some actions, 360</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what it is, 506, 600</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how a man may change, 507</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extent of one's responsibility for, 605</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sinning makes, 1041</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sinful, renders certain continuance in sinful actions, 1041</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dependent on habit, 1049</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chastisement, not punishment, 654, 766</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherubim, 449, 593</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Child, unborn, has promise and potency of spiritual manhood, 644</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>individuality of the, 492</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visited for sins of fathers, 634</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiliasts in all ages, 1007</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chinese, their religion a survival of patriarchial family worship, 180</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their history, its commencement, 225</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may have left primitive abodes while language still monosyllabic, 478</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Choice, of an ultimate end, 504</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of means, 504</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>decision in favor of one among several conflicting desires, 505, 506</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not creation, our destiny, 508</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>New School idea of, 550</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first moral, 611</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evil, uniformity of, what it implies, 611</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contrary, possessed by Adam, 519</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not essential to will, 600</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as at present possessed by man, 605</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's, see <ref target='Index-Election'>Election</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Christ'/>
<l>Christ, his person and character must be historical, 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christ, no source for conception of, other than himself, 187</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conception of, could not originate in human genius, 187</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acceptance of the story of, a proof of his existence, 187</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some of the difficulties in which the assumption that the story of, is false, lands us, 188</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if the story of, is true, Christianity is true, 188</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his testimony to himself, its substance, 189</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his testimony to himself, not that of an intentional deceiver, 189</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his testimony to himself, not that of insanity or vanity, 189</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if neither mentally nor morally unsound, his testimony concerning himself is true, 190</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in his sympathy and sorrow reveals God's feeling, 266</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the whole Christ present in each believer, 281</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his supreme regard for God, 302</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recognized as God in certain passages, 305-308</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some passages once relied on to prove his divinity now given up for textual reasons, 308</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Old Testament descriptions of God applied to him, 309</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possesses attributes of God, 309</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>undelegated works of God are ascribed to him, 310</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives honor and worship due only to God, 311</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his name associated on equality with that of God, 312</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>equality with God expressly claimed for him, 312</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>si non Deus, non bonus</foreign>,</q>, 313</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proofs of his divinity in certain phrases applied to him, 313</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his divinity corroborated by Christian experience, 313, 682</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his divinity exhibited in hymns and prayers of church, 313</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his divinity, passages which seem inconsistent with, how to be regarded, 314</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as pre-incarnate Logos, Angel of Jehovah, 319</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in pre-existent state, the Logos, 335</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in pre-existent state, the Image of God, 335</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in pre-existent state, the Effulgence of God, 335</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the centrifugal action of Deity, 336</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Spirit, how their work differs, 338</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his eternal Sonship, 340</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if not God, cannot reveal him, 349</l>
<pb n='1066'/><anchor id='Pg1066'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>orders of creation to be united in, 444</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his human soul, 493</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his character convinces of sin, 539</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>he is the ideal and the way to it, 544</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not law, <q>the perfect Image</q> of God, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness, in what it consisted, 572</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Gethsemane felt for the race, 635</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with him believers have a connection of spiritual life, 636</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human nature in, may have guilt without depravity, 645</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>educator of the race, 666</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Person of, 669-700</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the doctrine of his Person stated, 669</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a brief historical survey of the doctrine of his Person, 669</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>views of the Ebionites concerning, 669</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reality of his body denied by Docetæ, 670</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>views of Arians concerning, 670</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>views of Apollinarians, 670, 671</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>views of Nestorians, 671, 672</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>views of Eutychians, 672</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the two natures of, their integrity, 673</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his humanity real, 673</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is expressly called <q>a man,</q>, 673</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his genealogies, 673</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had the essential elements of human nature, 674</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had the same powers and principles of normal humanity, 674</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his elocution, 674</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subject to the laws of human development, 675</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in twelfth year seems to enter on consciousness of his divine Sonship, 675</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suffered and died, 675</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies (Stroud) of a broken heart, 675</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lived a life of faith and prayer, and study of Scripture, 675</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the integrity of his humanity, 675-681</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supernaturally conceived, 675</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>free from hereditary depravity and actual sin, 676</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his ideal human nature, 678</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his human nature finds its personality in union with the divine, 679</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his human nature germinal, 680</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the <q>Everlasting Father,</q> 680</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Vine man, 680</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Docetic doctrine concerning, confuted, 681</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possessed a knowledge of his own deity, 681</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exercised divine prerogatives, 682</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in him divine knowledge and power, 682</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union of two natures in his one person, 683-700</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possesses a perfect divine and human nature, 683, 684</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proof of this union of natures in, 684</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>speaks of himself as a single person, 684</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributes of both his natures ascribed to one person, 684, 685</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scriptural representation of infinite value of atonement and union of race with God prove him divine, 685</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lutheran view as to communion of natures in, 686</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>four <foreign rend='italic'>genera</foreign> regarding the natures of Christ, 686</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union of natures in, 686</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theory of his incomplete humanity, 686</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objections to this theory, 687, 688</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theory of his gradual incarnation, 688, 689</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objections to this view, 689-691</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>real nature of union of persons in, 691-700</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>importance of correct views of the person of, 691, 692</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>chief problems in the doctrine of the person of, 692</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>why the union of the natures in the person of Christ is inscrutable, 693</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on what the possibility of the union of deity and humanity in his person is grounded, 693, 694</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no double personality in, 694-696</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union of natures in, its effect upon his humanity, 696, 697</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union of natures in, its effect upon the divine, 697</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this union of natures in the person of, necessary, 698</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the union of natures in, eternal, 698, 699</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the infinite and finite in, 699, 700</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the two states of, 701-710</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the nature of his humiliation, 701-706</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not the union in him of Logos and human nature, 701</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his humiliation did not consist in the surrender of the relative divine attributes, 701</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objections to above view, 701-703</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his humiliation consisted in the surrender of the independent exercise of the Divine attributes, 703</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his humiliation consisted in the assumption by the pre-existent Logos of the servant-form, 703</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his humiliation consisted in the submission of the Logos to the Holy Spirit, 703</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his humiliation consisted in the surrender as to his human nature of all advantages accruing thereto from union with deity, 703, 704</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the five stages of his humiliation, 704-706</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his state of exaltation, 706-710</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the nature of his exaltation, 706, 707</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the stages of his exaltation, 707-710</l>
<pb n='1067'/><anchor id='Pg1067'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his quickening and resurrection, 707, 708</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his ascension, 708-710</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his offices, 710-776</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his offices three, 710</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Prophetic work, 710-713</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prophet, its meaning as applied to him, 710</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>three methods of fulfilling the prophet's office, 711</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his preparatory work as Logos, 711</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his ministry as incarnate, 711, 712</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his ascended guidance and teaching of the church on earth, 712</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his final revelation of the Father to the saints in glory, 712, 713</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Priestly office, 713-775</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in what respects he was a priest, 713</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his atoning work, see <ref target='Index-Atonement'>Atonement</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as immanent in the universe, see <ref target='Index-Logos'>Logos</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bearer of our humanity, life of our race, 715</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sufferings not atonement but revelation of atonement, 715</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death a moral stimulus to men, 716</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>did he ever utter the words <q>give his life a ransom for many</q>?, 717</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>did not preach, but established the gospel, 721</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a noble martyr, 729</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death the central truth of Christianity, 733, 764</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death set forth by Baptism and Lord's Supper, 733</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Great Penitent, 734, 737, 760</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Savior of all men, 739</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refused <q>the wine mingled with myrrh,</q>, 742</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>never makes confession of sin, 746</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a stumbling-block to modern speculation, 746</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had not hereditary depravity but guilt, 747, 762</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>was he slain by himself or another?, 747</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does he suffer intensively the infinite punishment of sin?, 747</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his obedience, active and passive, needed in salvation, 749, 770</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>died for all, 750</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incorporate with humanity, became our substitute, 750</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how <q>lifted up,</q>, 751</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mediator between the just God and the merciful God, 754</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in his organic union with the race is the vital relation which makes his vicarious sufferings either possible or just, 754</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as God immanent in humanity, is priest and victim, condemning and
condemned, atoning and atoned, 755</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>created humanity, and as immanent God sustains it, while it sins, thus becoming responsible for its sin, 755, 769</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as Logos smitten by guilt and punishment, 755</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the <q>must be</q> of his sufferings, what?, 755</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his race-responsibility not destroyed by incarnation, or purification in womb of Virgin, 756</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sufferings reveal the cross hidden in the divine love from foundation of the world, 756, 763</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in womb of Virgin purged from depravity, guilt and penalty remaining, 757, 759</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the central brain of our race through which all ideas must pass, 757</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his guilt, what?, 757</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>innocent in personal, but not race relations, 758</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his secular and church priesthood, 758</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>did he suffer only for his own share in sin of the race?, 758</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his incarnation an expression of a prior union with race beginning at creation, 758</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>various explanations of his identification with race, 759</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>he longed to suffer, 759</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>he could not help suffering, 760</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all nerves and sensibilities of race meet in him, 760</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his place in 2 Cor. 5:21, 760, 761</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when and how did he take guilt and penalty on himself, 761</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>import of his submission to John's baptism, 762</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>was he unjustified till his death?, 762</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his guilt first purged on Cross, 762</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as incarnate, revealed, rather than made, atonement, 762</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the personally unmerited sufferings of, the mystery of atonement, 768</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may have felt remorse as central conscience of humanity, 769</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sufferings, though temporal, met infinite demands of law, 769</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>paid a penalty equivalent, though not identical, 769, 770</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how Savior of all men, 772</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>specially Savior of those who believe, 773</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his priesthood, everlasting, 773</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as Priest he is intercessor, see <ref target='Index-Intercession'>Intercession</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Kingly office, 775</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his kingship defined, 775</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his kingdom of power, 775</l>
<pb n='1068'/><anchor id='Pg1068'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his kingdom of grace, 775, 776</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the only instance of <foreign rend='italic'>Fortwirkung</foreign> after death, 776</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his kingdom of glory, 776</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his kingdom, the antidote to despair concerning church, 776</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his kingship, two practical remarks upon, 776</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union with, see <ref target='Index-Union'>Union</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ascended, communicates life to church, 806</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>heathen may receive salvation from Christ without knowing giver or how gift was purchased, 843</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sufferings secure acquittal from penalty of law, 858</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his obedience secures reward of law, 858</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union with, secures his life as dominant principle in soul, 860</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his life in believer will infallibly extirpate all depravity, 860</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>we in,</q> Justification, 862</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>in us,</q> Sanctification, 862</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his twofold work in the world, 869</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a new object of attention to the believer, 873</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union with, secures impartation of spirit of obedience, 875</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his commands must not be modified by any church, 939</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>submitted to rites appointed for sinners, 943</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's judicial activity exercised through, 1027</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>qualified by his two natures to act as judge, 1027</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his body confined to space, 1032</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his soul not limited to space, 1032</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christianity, its triumph over paganism, the wonder of history, 191-193</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its influence on civilization, 193, 194</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its influence on individuals, 194, 195</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>submits to judgment by only test of a religion, not ideals, but performances, 195</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and pantheism, 282</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>circumstances favorable to its propagation, 666</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Japanese objection to its doctrine of brotherhood, 898</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christological method in theology, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christology, 665-776</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chronology, schemes of, 224, 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Church, its safety and aggressiveness dependent on sound doctrine, 18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to truth, 33</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>polity and ordinances of, their purpose, 546</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a prophetic institution, 712</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of the, 887-980</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constitution of the, or its Polity, 887-929</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in its largest signification, 887</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and kingdom, difference between, 887, 889</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>definition of, in Westminster Confession, 887</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the universal, includes all believers, 888</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>universal, the body of Christ, 888</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a transcendent element in, 888</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union with Christ, the presupposition of, 888</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the indwelling Christ, its elevating privilege, 888</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the universal or invisible distinguished from the local or visible, 889</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>individual, defined, 890</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the laws of Christ on which church gathered, 890</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a humanitarian organization, 890</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the term employed in a loose sense, 891</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>significance of the term etymologically, 891</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the secular use of its Greek form, 891</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used as a generic or collective term, 891</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Greek term translated, its derivation, 891</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>applied by a figure of rhetoric to many churches, 891</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the local, a divine appointment, 892</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Hebrew terms for, its larger and narrower use, 892</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ took his idea of, from Hebrew not heathen sources, 892</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exists for sake of the kingdom, 892</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>will be displaced by a Christian state, 893</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the decline of, not to be deplored, 893</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a voluntary society, 893</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>membership in, not hereditary or compulsory, 893</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union with, logically follows union with Christ, 893</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its doctrine, a necessary outgrowth of the doctrine of regeneration, 893</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>highest organism of human life, 894</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is an organism such as the religion of spirit necessarily creates, 891</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its organization may be informal, 894</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its organization may be formal, 894</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its organization in N. T. formal, 894</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its developed organization indicated by change of names from Gospels to Epistles, 895</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not an exclusively spiritual organization, 895</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of Plymouth Brethren concerning, 895, 896</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>organization of the, not definitely prescribed in N. T. and left to expediency; an erroneous theory, 896</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>government of, five alleged forms in N. T., 897</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regenerate persons only members of, 897</l>
<pb n='1069'/><anchor id='Pg1069'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ law giver of, 897</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>members on equality, 898</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one member of, has no jurisdiction over another, 898</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>independent of civil power, 899</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>local, its sole object, 899</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>local, united worship a duty of, 899</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its law, the will of Christ, 900</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>membership in, qualifications prescribed for, 900</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>membership in, duties attached to, 900</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its genesis, 900</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in germ before Pentecost, 900</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>three periods in life of, 901</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>officers elected as occasion demanded, 901</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Paul's teaching concerning, progressive, 902</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how far synagogue was model of, 902</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a new, how constituted, 902</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in formation of, a council not absolutely requisite, 902, 903</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Antioch, its independent career, 903</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its government, 903-926</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its government, as to source of authority, an absolute monarchy, 903</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its government, as to interpretation and execution of Christ's law, an absolute democracy, 903</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>should be united in action, 904</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union of, in action should be, not passive submission, but intelligent co-operation, 904</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>peaceful unity in, result of Spirit's work, 904</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Baptist, law of majority rule in, 904</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a whole responsible for doctrinal and practical purity, 905</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordinances committed to custody of whole, 905</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a whole, elects its officers and delegates, 906</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a whole, exercises discipline, 907</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the self government of, an educational influence, 908</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pastor's duty to, 908</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the world church or Romanist theory of, considered, 908-911</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Peter as foundation of, what meant by the statement, 909-911</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>See also <ref target='Index-Peter'>Peter</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the hierarchical government of, corrupting and dishonoring to Christ, 911</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the theory of a national, considered, 912-914</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Presbyterian system of the, authors upon, 912</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>independence of, when given up, 912</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a spiritual, incapable of delimitation, 913</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>officers of the, 914-924</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offices in, two, 914-916</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a plurality of eldership in the primitive, occasional, 915, 916</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the pastor, bishop or elder of the, his three fold duty, 916, 917</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the deacon, his duties, 917, 918</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>did women in the early church discharge diaconal functions?, 918</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordination of officers in, 918-924</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>See <ref target='Index-Ordination'>Ordination</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>local, highest ecclesiastical authority in N. T., 920</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>discipline of, 924-926</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation of, to sister churches, 926-929</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>each, the equal of any other, 926</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>each, directly responsible to Christ, and with spiritual possibilities equal to any other, 926</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>each, to maintain fraternity and co-operation with other churches, 926</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>each, should seek and take advice from other churches, 927</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fellowship of a, with another church may be broken by departures from Scriptural faith and practice, 928</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>independence of, qualified by interdependence, 928</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what it ought to do if distressed by serious internal disagreements, 928</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its independence requires largest co-operation with other churches, 929</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>list of authorities on general subject of the, 929</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordinances of the, 930-980</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>See <ref target='Index-Ordinances'>Ordinances</ref>, <ref target='Index-Baptism-Lords-Supper'>Baptism, and Lord's Supper</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Circulatio</hi>, 333</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumcision, of Christ, its import, 761</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its law and that of baptism not the same, 954, 955</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Circumincessio</hi>, 333</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Civilization, can its arts be lost?, 529</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coffin, called by Egyptians 'chest of the living,', 995</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cogito ergo Deus est</foreign>, 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cogito ergo sum = cogito scilicet sum</foreign>, 55</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cogito = cogitans sum</foreign>, 55</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cognition of finiteness, dependence, etc., the occasion of the direct cognition of the Infinite, Absolute, etc., 52</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coming, second, of Christ, 1003-1015</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the doctrine of, stated, 1003</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scriptures describing, 1003, 1004</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>statements concerning, not all spiritual, 1004</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>outward and visible, 1004</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the objects to be secured at, 1004</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to be <q>in like manner</q> to his ascension, 1004, 1005</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>analogous to his first, 1005</l>
<pb n='1070'/><anchor id='Pg1070'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>can all men at one time see Christ at the?, 1005</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the time of, not definitely taught, 1005</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>predictions of, parallel those of his first, 1007</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>patient waiting for, disciplinary, 1007</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precursors of, 1008-1010</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a general prevalence of Christianity, a precursor of, 1008</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a deep and wide spread development of evil, a precursor of, 1008</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a personal antichrist, a precursor of, 1008</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>four signs of, according to some, 1010</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>millennium, prior to, 1010, 1011</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and millennium as pointed out in Rev. 20:4-10, 1011</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>immediately connected with a general resurrection and judgment, 1011</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of two kinds, 1014</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a reconciliation of pre-millenarian and post-millenarian theories suggested, 1014</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is the preaching which is to precede, to nations as wholes, or to each individual in a nation?, 1014</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the destiny of those living at, 1015</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comings of Christ, partial and typical, 1003</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commenting, its progress, 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commission, Christ's final, not confined to eleven, 906</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commercial theory of Atonement, 747</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Common law of church, what?, 970</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Communion, prerequisites to, 969-980</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>limitation of, commanded by Christ and apostles, 969</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>limitation of, implied in its analogy to Baptism, 969</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prerequisites to, laid down not by church, but by Christ and his apostles expressly or implicitly, 970</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prerequisites to, are four, 970</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Regeneration, a prerequisite to, 971</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Baptism, a prerequisite to, 971</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the apostles were baptized before, 971</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the command of Christ places baptism before, 971</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in all cases recorded in N. T. baptism precedes, 971</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the symbolism of the ordinances requires baptism to precede, 971, 972</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>standards of principal denominations place baptism before, 972</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>where baptism customarily does not precede, the results are unsatisfactory, 972</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>church membership, a prerequisite to, 973</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a church rite, 973</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a symbol of Christian fellowship, 973</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an orderly walk, a prerequisite to, 973</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>immoral conduct, a bar to, 973, 974</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disobedience to the commands of Christ, a bar to, 974</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>heresy, a bar to, 974</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>schism, a bar to, 975</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restricted, the present attitude of Baptist churches to, 976</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>local church under responsibility to see its, preserved from disorder, 975, 976</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>open, advocated because baptism cannot be a term of communion, not being a term of salvation, 977</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>open, contrary to the practice of organised Christianity, 977</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no more binding than baptism, 978</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>open, tends to do away with baptism, 978</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>open, destroys discipline, 978</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>open, tends to do away with the visible church, 979</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>strict, objections to, answered briefly, 979, 980</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>open, its justification briefly considered, 980</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a list of authors upon, 980</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Compact with Satan, 458</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Complex act, part may designate whole, 946</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concept, not a mental image, 7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in theology, may be distinguished by definition from all others, 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concupiscence, what?, 522</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Romish doctrine of, 604</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concurrence in all operations at basis of preservation, 411</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine efficiency in, does not destroy or absorb the efficiency assisted, 418</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's, in evil acts only as they are natural acts, 418, 419</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confession, Romanist view of, 834</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conflagration, final, 1012</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confucianism, 180, 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Confucius'/>
<l>Confucius, 180, 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Connate ideas, 53, 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conscience, what?, 82, 83</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proves existence of a holy Lawgiver and Judge, 82</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its supremacy, 82</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>warns of existence of law, 82</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>speaks in imperative, 82</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represents to itself some other as judge, 82</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the will it expresses superior to ours, 83</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witness against pantheism, 103</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thirst of, assuaged by Christ's sacrifice, 297</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its nature, 498</l>
<pb n='1071'/><anchor id='Pg1071'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a faculty, but a mode, 498</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intellectual element in, 498</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>emotional element in, 498</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>solely judicial, 498</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>discriminative, 498</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impulsive, 498</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>other mental processes from which it is to be distinguished, 499</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the moral judiciary of the soul, 500</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must be enlightened and cultivated, 500</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an echo of God's voice, 501</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in its relation to God as holy, 502</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the organ by which the human spirit finds God in itself, and itself in God, 503</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rendered less sensitive, but cannot be annulled, by sin, 647</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>needs Christ's propitiation, 736</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>absolute liberty of, a distinguishing tenet of Baptists, 898, 899</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consciousness, Christian, not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>norma normans</foreign>, but <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>norma normata</foreign>, 28</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 63</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not source of other knowledge, 63</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>self, primarily a distinguishing of itself from itself, 104</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>comes logically before consciousness of the world, 104</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>self consciousness, what?, 252</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consubstantiation, 968</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contrary choice, in Adam, 519</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not essential to will, 600, 605</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its present limits, 605</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contrition, Romish doctrine of, 834</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conversion, God's act in the will in, 793</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sudden, 827</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 829</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation to regeneration, 829</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>voluntary, 829</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man's relation to God in, 830</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conversions other than the first, 831</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relations of the divine and human in, 831</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cosmological argument, see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Covetousness, what?, 569</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cranial capacity of man and apes, 473</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creatianism, its advocates, 491</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its tenets, 491</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its untenability, 491-493</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creation, attributed to Christ, 310</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributed to Spirit, 316</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of, 371-410</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>definition of, 371, 372</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by man of ideas and volitions and indirectly of brain modifications, 371</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is change of energy into force, 371</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lotzean, author's view of, 372</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not <q>production out of nothing,</q>, 372</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not <q>fashioning,</q>, 372, 373</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not an emanation from divine substance, 372</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divine in, the origination of substance, 373</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>free act of a rational will, 373</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>externalization of God's thought, 373</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creation and <q>generation</q> and <q>procession,</q>, 373</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is God's voluntary limitation of himself, 373</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how an act of the triune God, 373</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not necessary to a trinitarian God, 373</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the doctrine of, proved only from Scripture, 374</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>direct Scripture statements concerning, discussed, 374-377</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of, originates, when we think of things as originating in God immediately, 375</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Paul's idea of, 376</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>absolute, heathen had glimpses of, 376</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>best expressed in Hebrew, 376</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found among early Babylonians, 376</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found in pre-Zoroastrian, Vedic, and early Egyptian religions, 376</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in heathen systems, 377</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>literature on, 377</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>out of nothing,</q> its origin, 377</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>indirect evidence of, from Scripture, 377, 378</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theories which oppose, 378-391</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dualism opposes, see <ref target='Index-Dualism'>Dualism</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Emanation opposes, see <ref target='Index-Emanation'>Emanation</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creation from eternity, theory stated, 386</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not necessitated by God's omnipotence, 387</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contradictory in terms and irrational, 387</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>another form of the see-saw philosophy, 387</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not necessitated by God's timelessness, 387</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inconceivable, 387</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not consistent with the conception of universe as an organism, 388</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not necessitated by God's immutability, 388</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not necessitated by God's love, 388, 389</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inconsistent with God's independence and personality, 389</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>outgrowth of Unitarian tendencies, 389</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creation, opposed by theory of spontaneous generation, see <ref target='Index-Generation-Spontaneous'>Generation, Spontaneous</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mosaic account of, 391-397</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>asserts originating act of God in, 391</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>makes God antedate and create matter, 391</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recognizes development, 392</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lays the foundation for cosmogony, 392</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>can be interpreted in harmony with mediate creation or evolution, 392</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not an allegory or myth, 394</l>
<pb n='1072'/><anchor id='Pg1072'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mosaic account of, not the blending of inconsistent stories,-394</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be interpreted in a hyperliteral way, 394</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not use <q>day</q> for a period of twenty-four hours, 394</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not a precise geological record, 395</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its scheme in detail, 395-397</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>literature upon, 396, 397</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creation, God's end in, 397-402</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's end in, his own glory, 398</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's chief end in, the manifestation of his glory, 398</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his glory most valuable end in, 399</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his glory only end in, consistent with his independence and sovereignty, 399</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his glory the end in, which secures every interest of the universe, 400</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his glory the end in, because it is the end proposed to his creatures, 401</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its final value, its value for God, 402</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the doctrine of, its relation to other doctrines, 402-410</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to the holiness and benevolence of God, 402</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first, in what senses <q>very good,</q>, 402</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pain and imperfection in, before moral evil, reasons for, 402</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sets forth wisdom and free-will of God, 404</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ in, the Revealer of God, and the remedy of pessimism, 405</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents God in Providence and Redemption, 407</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives value to the Sabbath, 408</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creation of man, exclusively a fact of Scripture, 465</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scripture declares it an act of God, 465</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scripture silent on method of, 465</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scripture does not exclude mediate creation of body, if this method probable from other sources, 465, 491</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and theistic evolution, 466</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his soul, its creation, though mediate, yet immediate, 466, 491</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not from brute, but <emph>from</emph> God, <emph>through</emph> brute, 467, 469, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the last stage in the development of life, 469</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unintelligible unless the immanent God is regarded as giving new impulses to the process, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as to soul and body, in a sense immediate, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>natural selection, its relations to, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by laws of development, which are methods of the Creator, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when finished presents, not a brute, but a man, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constitutes him the offspring of God, and God his Father, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as taking place through Christ, made its product a son of God by relationship to the Eternal Son, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theory of its occurrence at several centres, 481</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and his new creation compared, 694</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in it body made corruptible, soul incorruptible, 991</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creation, continuous, its doctrine, 415</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its advocates, 416</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the element of truth in, 416</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its error, 416</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contradicts consciousness, 416</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exaggerates God's power at expense of other attributes, 417</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>renders personal identity inexplicable, 417</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tends to pantheism, 417</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Creatura</hi>, 392</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Credo quia impossibile est</foreign>, 34</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creeds, 18, 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crime best prevented by conviction of its <emph>desert</emph> of punishment, 655</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Crimen læsæ majestatis</foreign>, 748</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Criminal theory, 748</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Criticism, higher, 169-172</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what it means, 169</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>influenced by spirit in which conducted, 169, 170</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its teachings on Pentateuch and Hexateuch, 170</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reveals God's method in making up record of his revelation, 172</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>literature upon, 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cumulative argument, 71</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cur Deus Homo</hi>, synopsis of, 748</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Curse</q> in Gal. 3:13, 760</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Custom, immemorial,</q> binding, 970</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Damn,</q> its present connotation acquired from impression made on popular mind by Scriptures, 1046</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Damnation</q> in 1 Cor. 11:22, its meaning, 960</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darwinism, its teaching, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its truth, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not a complete explanation of the history of life, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fails to account for origin of substance and of variations, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not take account of sudden appearance in the geological record of important forms of life, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaves gap between highest anthropoid and lowest specimen of man unspanned, 471</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fails to explain many important facts in heredity, 471</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must admit that natural selection has not yet produced a species, as far as we know, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as its author understood it, was not opposed to the Christian faith, 473</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1073'/><anchor id='Pg1073'/>

<lg>
<l>Day in Gen. 1, 35</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its meaning, 223, 224, 394, 395</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deacons, their duties, 917, 918</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordination of, 919</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deaconesses, 918</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dead, Christ's preaching to, 707, 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dead, Egyptian Book of the, 995</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extracts from, 995</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resurrection in, 1022</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>judgment in, 1024</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Deadly sins, the seven,</q> of Romanism, 571, 572</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Death, spiritual, a consequence of the Fall, 591</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spiritual, in what it consists, 591, 659, 660, 982</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>physical, its nature, 656, 982</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>physical, a part of the penalty of sin proved from Scripture, 656, 657</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and sin complemental, 657</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a natural law, on occasion of man's sin, appointed to a moral use, 657</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the liberator of souls, 658</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the penalty of sin, proved from reason, 658</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its universality how alone explained consistently with idea of God's justice, 658</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a necessary law of organized being, 658</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>higher being might have been attained without its intervention, 658</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to Christian not penalty, but chastisement and privilege, 659, 983, 984</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eternal, what?, 660</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>second, 648, 982, 983, 1013</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not cessation of being, 984</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as dissolution, cannot affect indivisible soul, 984</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a cessation of consciousness preparatory to other development, considered, 986</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot terminate the development for which man was made, 986</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot so extinguish being that no future vindication of God's moral government is possible, 987</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot, by annihilation, falsify the testimony of man's nature to immortality, 989</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man's body only made liable to, 991</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as applied to soul, designates an unholy and unhappy state of being, 992</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consciousness after, indicated in many Scriptures, 993, 994</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a <q>sleep,</q>, 994</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of two kinds, 1013</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its passionless and statuesque tranquility prophetic, 1016</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decree to act not the act, 354, 359</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decree, the divine, permissive in case of evil, 354, 365</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decree, not a cause, 360</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of end and means combined, 353, 363, 364</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not efficiently work evil choices in men, 365</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to permit sin, and the fact of the permission of sin equally equitable, 365</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to initiate a system in which sin has a place, how consistent with God's holiness?, 367</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decrees of God, the, 353-370</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their definition, 353-355</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>many to us, yet in nature one plan, 353</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relations between, not chronological but logical, 353</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>without necessity, 353</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relate to things outside of God, 53</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>respect acts, both of God and free creatures, 354</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not addressed to creatures, 354</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all human acts covered by, 354</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>none of them read <q>you shall sin,</q>, 354</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sinful acts of men, how related to, 354</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how divided, 355</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>declared by Scripture to include all things, 355</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>declared by Scripture to deal with special things and events, 355</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proved from divine foreknowledge, 356</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>respect foreseen results, 356</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proved from divine wisdom, 358</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proved from divine immutability, 358, 359</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proved from the divine benevolence, 359</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a ground of thanksgiving, 359</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not inconsistent with man's free agency, 359</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>do not remove motive for exertion, 363</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and fate, 363</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>encourage effort, 364</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>they do not make God the author of sin, 365</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>practical uses of the doctrine of, 368</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the doctrine of, dear to matured understanding and deep experience, 368</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how the doctrine should be preached, 369</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deism, defined, 414</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some of its advocates, 414</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an exaggeration of God's transcendence, 414</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rests upon a false analogy, 415</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a system of anthropomorphism, 415</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>denies providential interference, 415</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tends to atheism, 415</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Delivering to Satan,</q> 457</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delphic oracle, 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demons, see <ref target='Index-Angels-Evil'>Angels, evil</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Depravity, explained by a personal act in the previous timeless state of being, 488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of nature, repented of by Christians, 555</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Arminian theory of, 601, 602</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>New School theory of, 606, 607</l>
<pb n='1074'/><anchor id='Pg1074'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Federal theory of, 612, 613</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Augustinian theory of, 619, 620</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 637</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>total, its meaning, 637-639</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is subjective pollution, 645, 646</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ had no, 645, 756-758</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of human will, requires special divine influence, 784</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of all humanity, 813</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Determinatio est negatio</foreign>, 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Determinism, 362, 507-510</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus nescit se quid est quia non est quid</foreign>, 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deuteronomy, 167-169, 171, 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devil, 454, 455</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dextra Dei ubique est</foreign>, 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Diabolus nullus, nullus Redemptor</foreign>, 462</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diatoms, and natural selection, 471</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dichotomous and Dichotomy, see <ref target='Index-Man'>Man</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dies Iræ</foreign>, the, 645, 1056</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dignity, the plural of, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disciples or Campbellites, 821, 840, 947</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Discrepancies, alleged, in Scripture, 107, 108, 173, 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divorce, permitted by Moses, 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Docetæ, 670</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Doctor angelicus</hi>, 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Doctor subtilis</hi>, 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doctrine, 17, 33, 34</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Documentary evidence, 141, 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doddridge's dream, 453</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dogmatic system implied in Scripture, 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dogmatism, 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Domine, quousque?</foreign> Calvin's motto, 1008</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Donum supernaturale</foreign>, 522</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dort, Synod of, 614, 777</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Douay version, Mat. 26:28 in, 965</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dualism'/>
<l>Dualism, two forms of, 378</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a form of, holds two distinct and co-eternal principles, 378</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a history of this form of, 378-380</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this form of, presses the maxim <hi rend='italic'>ex nihilo nihil fit</hi> too far, 380</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this form of, applies the test of inconceivability too rigidly, 380</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this form of, unphilosophical, 381</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this form of, limits God's power and blessedness, 381</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this form of, fails to account for moral evil, 381</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>another form of, holds the existence of two antagonistic spirits, 381, 382</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this form of, at variance with the Scriptural representation of God, 382</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this form of, opposed to the Scriptural representation of the Prince of Evil, 382</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ducit quemque voluptas</foreign>, 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duties, our, not all disclosed in revelation, 545</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebionism, 669</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ebionites'/>
<l>Ebionites, 669, 670</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecclesiastes, 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecclesiology, 887-980</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eden, adapted to infantile and innocent manhood, 583</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Education, by impersonal law, and by personal dependence, 434</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Efficacious call, its nature, 792, 793</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Effulgence,</q>, 335</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ego, cognition of it logically precedes that of non ego, 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptian language, old, its linguistic value, 497</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of blessedness of future life dependent on preservation of body, 995</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of permanent union of soul and body, 1022</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>way of representing God, 376, 377</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge of future state, 995</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Einzige, der</foreign>, every man is, 353</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eldership, plural, 915, 916</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Election'/>
<l>Election, its relation to God's decrees, 355</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>logically subsequent to redemption, 777</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to share in atonement but to special influence of Spirit, 779</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of, 779-790</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>definition, 779</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proof from Scripture, 779-782</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>statement preliminary to proof, 779</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>asserted of certain individuals, 780</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>asserted in connection with divine foreknowledge, 780, 781</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>asserted to be a matter of grace, 781</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>connected with a giving by Father to Son of certain persons, 781</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>connected with union with Christ, 781</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>connected with entry in the Lamb's Book of Life, 781</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>connected with allotment as disciples to certain believers, 782</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>connected with a special call of God, 782</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>connected with a birth by God's will, 782</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>connected with gift of repentance and faith, 782</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>connected with holiness and good works as a gift, 782</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lutheran view of, 782, 783</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Arminian view of, 783</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a group of views concerning, 783</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proved from reason, 783-785</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is the purpose or choice which precedes gift of regenerating grace, 783</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not conditioned on merit or faith in chosen, 784</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>needed by depravity of human will, 784</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>other considerations which make it more acceptable to reason, 785</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objections to, 785-790</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is unjust, 785</l>
<pb n='1075'/><anchor id='Pg1075'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is partial, 786</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ethical side of natural selection, 786</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is arbitrary, 787</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is immoral, 787, 788</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fosters pride, 788</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>discourages effort, 788, 789</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implies reprobation, 789, 790</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>list of authors on, 790</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elijah, his translation, 995</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>John the Baptist as, 1013</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elizabeth, Queen, immersed, 937</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elohim, 318, 319</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Emanation'/>
<l>Emanation theory of origin of universe, 378-383</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Empirical theory of morals, truth in, 501</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconciled with intuitional theory, 501</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Encratites, deny to woman <q>the image of God,</q>, 524</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Endor, woman of, 966</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Enemies,</q> Rom. 5:10, 719</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Energy, mental, life, 252</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resisted, force, 252</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>universe derived from, 252</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its change into force is creation, 252</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dissipation of, 374, 415</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enghis and Neanderthal crania, 471</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enmity to God, 569, 817, 818</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enoch, translation of, 658, 994</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Environment, 426, 1034, 1049</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eophyte and Eozoon, 395</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epicureanism, 91, 184, 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Error, systems of, suggest organizing superhuman intelligences, 457</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Errors in Scripture, alleged, 222-236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eschatology, 981-1056</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Esprit gelé</foreign> (matter) Schelling's bon mot, 386</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Essenes, 787</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esther, book of, 237, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Eternal sin, an,</q>, 1034, 1048</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eternity, 276</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethics, how conditioned, 3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christian and Christian faith inseparable, 636</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eucharist, see <ref target='Index-Lords-Supper'>Supper, the Lord's</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eutaxiology, 75</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eutychians'/>
<l>Eutychians (Monophysites), 672</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eve, 525, 526, 676</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evidence, principles of, 141-144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evil, 354, 1053</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evolution, behind that of our own reason stands the Supreme Reason, 25</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and revelation constitute nature, 26</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an, of Scripture as of natural science, 35</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of ideas, not from sense to nonsense, 64</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has given man the height fromwhich he can discern stars of moral truth previously hidden below the horizon, 65</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a process, not a power, 76</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>only a method of God, 76</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spells purpose, 76</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>awake to ends within the universe, but not to the great end of the universe itself, 76</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>answers objections by showing the development of useful collocations from initial imperfections, 78</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has reinforced the evidences of intelligence in the universe, 79</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transfers cause to an immanent rational principle, 79</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a materialized, logical process, 84</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of universe inexplicable unless matter is moved from without, 92</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extension and, being, having thought and will, reveals itself in, 101</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>only another name for Christ, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>views nature as a progressive order consisting of higher levels and phenomena unknown before, 121</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its principle, the Logos or Divine Reason, 123</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its continuity that of plan not of force, 128</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>depends on increments of force with persistency of plan, 123</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>irreconcilable with Deism and its distant God, 123</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the basis and background of a Christianity which believes in a dynamical universe of which a personal and loving God is the inner source of energy, 123</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implies not the <emph>uniformity</emph>, but <emph>universality</emph> of law, 126</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has successive stages, with new laws coming in, and becoming dominant, 125</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Hegel, a fact but fatalistic, 176</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of human society not primarily intellectual, but religious, 194</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is developing <emph>reverence</emph> with its allied qualities, 194</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if not recognized in Scripture leads to a denial of its unity, 217</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of <q>Truth&mdash;evolvable from the whole, evolved at last painfully,</q>, 218</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has given us a new Bible&mdash;a book which has grown, 224, 230, 231</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a progress in prophecy, doctrine and church-polity seen in Paul's epistles, 236</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a tale of battle, but a love-story, 264</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the object of nature, and altruism the object of evolution, 264</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explains the world as the return of the highest to itself, 266</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the idea of holiness and love exhibited in the palæontological
<pb n='1076'/><anchor id='Pg1076'/>
struggle for life and for the life of others, 268, 393</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is God's omnipresence in time, 282</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of his own being, God not shut up to a necessary, 287</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>working out a nobler and nobler justice is proof that God is just, 292</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a method of Christ's operation, 311</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in its next scientific form will maintain the divineness of man and exalt Jesus of Nazareth to an eminence secure and supreme, 328</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Father,</q> more than symbol of the cause of organic, 334</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and gravitation, all the laws of, are the work and manifestation of the present Christ, 337</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the conception of God in, leads to a Trinitarian conception, 349</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theological, are the heathen trinities stages in?, 352</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a regress terminating in the necessity of a creator, 374</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a self, of God, so Stoic monism regarded the world, 389</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implies previous involution, 390</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assumes initial arrangements containing the possibilities of the order afterwards evolved, 390</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unable to create something out of nothing, 390</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the attempt to comprehend the world of experience in terms of fundamental idealistic postulates, 390</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>that ignores freedom of God is pantheistic, 390</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from the nebula to man, unfolds a Divine Self, 390</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>but a habitual operation of God, 390</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not an eternal or self-originated process, 391</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>natural selection without teleological factors cannot account for biological, 391</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and creation, no antagonism between, 391</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its limits, 392</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Spencer's definition of, stated and criticized, 392</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>illustrated in progress from Orohippus to horse of the present, 392</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of inorganic forces and materials, an, in this the source of animate species, yet the Mosaic account of creation not discredited, 392</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in all forms of energy, higher and lower, dependent directly on will of God, 393</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the struggle for life to palæontological stages of, the beginning of the sense of right and justice, 268, 393</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the struggle for the life of others in palæontological stages of, the beginning of altruism, 268, 393</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the science of, has strengthened teleology, 397</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its flow constitutes the self-revelation of the Infinite One, 413</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>process of, easier believed in as a divine self-evolution than as a mechanical process, 459</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of man, physical and psychical, no exception to process of, yet faith in God intact, 465</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot be explained without taking into account the originating agency of God, 465</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not make the idea of Creator superfluous, 466</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theist must accept, if he keep his argument for existence of God from unity of design, 466</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of music depends on power of transmitting intellectual achievements, 466</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unintelligible except as immanent God gives new impulses to the process, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>according to Mivart, it can account neither for body or soul of man, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>still incomplete, man is still on all fours, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an atheistic, a reversion to the savage view, 473</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theistic, regards human nature as efflux and reflection of the Divine Personality, 473</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>atheistic, satirized, 473</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a superior intelligence has guided, 473</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>phylogenetic, in the creation of Eve, 525</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>normal, man's will may induce a counter-evolution to, 591</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the goal of man's, is Christ, 680</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the derivation of spiritual gifts from the Second Adam consonant with, 681</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of humanity, the whole, depicted in the Cross and Passion, 716</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the process by which sons of God are generated, 967</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Example, Christ did not simply set, 732</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exegesis based on trustworthiness of verbal vehicle of inspiration, 216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exercise-system of Hopkins and Emmons, 45, 416, 417, 584, 607, 822</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Existence of God, see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ex nihilo nihil fit</foreign>, 380</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Experience, 28, 63-65</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Expiation, representative, recognized among Greeks, 723</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ezra, his relation to O. T., 167</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fact local, truth universal, 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Facts not to be neglected, because relations are obscure, 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faculties, mental, man's three, 487</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1077'/><anchor id='Pg1077'/>

<lg>
<l>Faith, a higher sort of knowledge, 3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>physical science rests on, 3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>never opposed to reason, 3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conditioned by holy affection, 3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>act of integral soul, 4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>can alone furnish material for a scientific theology, 4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not blind, 5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fiducia</foreign> includes <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>notitia</foreign>, 5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its place in the Arminian system, 605, 864</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a truth, possible in spite of difficulties to us insoluble, 629</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not save, but atonement which it accepts, 771</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>saving, is the gift of God, 782</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an effect, not cause, of election, 784</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>involves repentance, 836</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 836</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>analyzed, 837</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an intellectual element (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>notitia</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credere Deum</foreign>) in, 837</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must lay hold of a present Christ, 837</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an emotional element (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>assensus</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>credere Deo</hi>) in, 837</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a voluntary element (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fiducia</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credere in Deum</foreign>) in, 838</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>self-surrender to good physician, 838</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the reflection of the Divine knowing and willing in man's finite spirit, 838</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its most important element, will, 838</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a bond between persons, 839</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appropriates Christ as source of pardon and life, 839</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its three elements illustrated, 839</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>phrases descriptive of, 839</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no element in, must be exaggerated at expense of the others, 839</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>views refuted by a proper conception of, 840</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an act of the affections and will, 840</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a purely intellectual state, 841</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a moral act, and involves responsibility, 841</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>saving, its general and particular objects, 842</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is believing in God as far as he has revealed himself, 842,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is it ever produced <q>without a preacher</q>? 843, 844</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its ground of faith, the external word, 844</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its ground of assurance, the Spirit's inward witness, 844</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it is possible without assurance?, 845</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>necessarily leads to goods works, 846</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not to be confounded with love or obedience, 847</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a work and yet excluded from the category of works, 847</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instrumental cause of salvation, 847</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the intermediate factor between undeveloped tendency toward God and developed affection for God, 847</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must not be confounded with its fruits, 848</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the actinic ray, 848</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is susceptible of increase, 848</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors on the general subject of, 849</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>why justified by faith rather than other graces?, 864</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not with the work of Christ a joint cause of justification, 864</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to justification, 865</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the mediate cause of sanctification, 872</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secures righteousness (justification plus sanctification), 873</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faithfulness, Divine, 288, 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Fall'/>
<l>Fall, Scriptural account of temptation and, 582-585</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if account of, mythical, yet inspired and profitable, 582</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reasons for regarding account of, as historical, 582, 583</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the stages of temptation that preceded, 584, 585</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how possible to a holy being?, 585, 586</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incorrect explanations of, 585</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God not its author, 586</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>was man's free act of revolt from God, 587</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot be explained on grounds of reason, 587</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>was wilful resistance to the inworking God, 587</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>was choice of supreme love to the world and self rather than supreme devotion to God, 587</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot be explained psychologically, 587</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is an ultimate fact, 587</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an immanent preference which was first a choice and then an affection, 588</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's permission of the temptation preceding, benevolent, 588</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not Satanic, because not self-originated, 588</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its temptation objectified in an embodied seducer, an advantage, 588</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presented no temptation having tendency in itself to lead astray, 588, 589</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the slightness of the command in, the best test of obedience, 589</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the command in, was not arbitrary, 589</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the greatness of the sanction incurred in, had been announced and should have deterred, 590</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the revelation of a will alienated from God, 590</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>physical death a consequence of, 590</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brought death at once, 590</l>
<pb n='1078'/><anchor id='Pg1078'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mortal effects of the, counteracted by grace, 590</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death said by some not to be a consequence of the, 591</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spiritual death, a consequence of, 591</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>arrested the original tendency of man's whole nature to God, 591</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>depraved man's moral and religious nature, 591</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>left him with his will fundamentally inclined to evil, 592</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>darkened the intuition of reason, 592</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rendered conscience perverse in its judgments, 592</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>terminated man's unrestrained intercourse with God, 592, 593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imposed banishment from the garden, 593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constituted Adam's posterity sinful, see <ref target='Index-Imputation'>Imputation</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of human nature could only occur in Adam, 629</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>repented of, because apostasy of our common nature, 629</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all responsible for the one sin of the, as race-sin, 630</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has depraved human nature, 637</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has rendered human nature totally unable to do that which is good in God's sight, 640</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has brought the race under obligation to render satisfaction for self-determined violation of law, 644</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fallen condition of man, Romanist and Protestant views of, 521, 522</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Falsehood, what?, 569</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fatalism, 427</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fate and the decrees of God, 363</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Father, God as, see <ref target='Index-Trinity'>Trinity</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Father,</q> how applied to whole Trinity, 333</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>'our,' import, 334</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Federal theology, 45, 46, 50, 612-616</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feeling, 17, 20, 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fellowship, Christian, not church, 979</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fetichism, 56, 532</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiction, the truest, has no heroes, 575</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Final cause, 44, 52, 60, 62, 75-77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Final Things, doctrine of, 981-1056</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finality, 75, 76, 78, 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fishes, the earliest, ganoids large and advanced in type, 470</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flesh, 562, 588, 673</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Fold,</q> none under New Dispensation, 807</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fons Trinitatis</hi>, 341</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Force, no mental image of, 7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not the atom, the real ultimate, 91</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a property of matter, 91, 96</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>behind all its forms, co-ordinating mind, 95</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>atom a centre of, 96</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>matter a manifestation of, 96, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expressed in vibrations foundation of all we know of extended world, 96</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the only, we know is that of our own wills, 96</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>real, lies in the Divine Being, as living, active will, 97</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>matter and mind as respectively external and internal centres of, 98</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a function of will, 99, 109, 415, 416</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all except that of men's free will, is the will of God, 99</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the product of will, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in universe works in rational ways and must be product of spirit, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ, the principle of every manifestation of, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is God with his moral attributes omitted, 259</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is energy under resistance, 371</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is energy manifesting itself under self-conditioning or differential forms, 371</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with the Divine Will, theories in which, 412</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and will are one in God, 412</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>every natural, a generic volition of God, 413</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a portion of God's, disjoined from him in the free-will of intelligent beings, 414</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>super cuncta, subter cuncta</foreign>, 414</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not always Divine will, 416</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in its various differentations adjusted by God, 436</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foreknowledge of God of all future acts directly, 284</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acts of free will excepted by some, 284, 285</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>denial of the absolute, productive of dread, 285</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded by some as insoluble, 285</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps explicable by the possibility of an all-embracing present, 285</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constant teaching of Scripture favors, 285</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mediate, what?, 285</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>immediate, what?, 285</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if intuitive, difficulty removed, 285, 357, 362</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rests on fore-ordination, 356</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preceded logically by decree, 356, 357</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of undecreed actuals (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign>), not possible, 357</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two kinds of, 358</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the middle knowledge of Molina, 358</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of individuals, 781</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from fore-ordination, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forgiveness, not in nature but in grace, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot be granted unconditionally by public bodies, 766</l>
<pb n='1079'/><anchor id='Pg1079'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>more than the taking away of penalty, 767</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>optional with God since he makes satisfaction, 767</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human accorded without atonement, why not divine?, 835</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined in personal, ethical and legal terms, 854, 855</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's act as Father, 855</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>none in nature, 855</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not ensure immediate removal of natural consequences of sin, 855</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the peculiar characteristic of Christian experience, 856</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fore-ordination, its nature, 355, 381</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the basis of foreknowledge, 356</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from foreknowledge, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forms of thought are facts of nature, 10</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fourth gospel, its genuineness, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Free agency defined, 360</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>can predict its action, 360</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freedom, man's, consistent with the divine decrees, 359-362</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>four senses of word, 361</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of indifference, 362</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of choice, which is not incompatible with the complete bondage of will, 509, 510</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>remnants of, left to man, 510, 640</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Freundlos war der grosse Weltenmeister</hi>, 386</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Fürsehung</foreign> and <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Vorsehung</foreign> combined in <q>Providence,</q> 419</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Future life, the evidence of Jewish belief in a, 994</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Egyptian ideas about, 995</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moses instructed in Egyptian <q>learning</q> concerning, 995</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proof-texts for, 996</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of Pharisees supports, 996</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ's argument for, 996</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>argument for, presupposes the existence of a truthful, wise and good creator, 996</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the most conclusive proof of, Christ's resurrection, 997</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ taught the doctrine of, 997</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a revelation of, needed, 997</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Futurist method of interpreting Revelation, 1009</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galton's view of piety, 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ganoids, the first geologic fishes, 470</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Gemachte, das</foreign>, sin is, 566</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genealogies of Scripture, 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Generation-Spontaneous'/>
<l>Generation, as applied to the Son, 340-343</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spontaneous, 389</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genuineness of the Christian documents, 143-154</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the books of O. T., 165-172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Genus apotelesmaticum</foreign>, 686</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>idiomaticum</foreign>, 686</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>majestaticum</foreign>, 686</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Genus tapeinoticon</foreign>, 686</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gesetz</hi>, 533</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gethsemane, 677, 731</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Gewordene, das</foreign>, is not sin, 566</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glory, final state of righteous, 1029</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his own, why God's end in creation?, 397-402</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gnostic Ebionism, 669, 670</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gnostics, 20, 378, 383, 487</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-God'/>
<l>God, the subject of theology, though aprehended by faith, yet a subject of science, 3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human mind can recognize God, 4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>though not phenomenal, can be known, 5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>because of analogies between his nature and ours, can be known, 7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>though no adequate image of, can be formed, yet may be known, 7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>since all predicates of God are not negative, he may be known, 9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>so limited and defined, that he may be known, 10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his laws of thought ours, and so he may be known, 10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>can reveal himself by external revelation, 12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revealed in nature, history, conscience, Scripture, 14</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ the only revealer of, 14</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the existence of, 52-110</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>definitions of the term, 52</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his existence a first truth, or rational intuition, 52</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his existence conditions observation and reasoning, 52</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his existence rises into consciousness on reflection on phenomena of nature and mind, 52</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge of his existence, universal, 56-58</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge of his existence, necessary, 58, 59</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge of his existence, logically independent of and prior to, all other knowledge, 59-62</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>other suggested sources of our idea of, 62-67</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of, not from external revelation, 62, 63</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of, not from tradition, 63</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of, not from experience, 63-65</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of, not from sense perception and reflection, 63, 64</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of, not from race-experience, 64, 65</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of, not from actual contact of our sensitive nature with God, 65</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rational intuition of, sometimes becomes presentative, 65</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of, does not arise from reasoning, 65, 66</l>
<pb n='1080'/><anchor id='Pg1080'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>faith in, not proportioned to strength of reasoning faculty, 65</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>we know more of, than reasoning can furnish, 65, 66</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of, not derived from inference, 66, 67</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in, not a mere working hypothesis, 67</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intuition of, its contents, 67-70</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what he is, men to some extent know intuitively, 67</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a presentative intuition of, possible, 67</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a presentative intuition of, perhaps normal experience, 67</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loss of love has weakened rational intuition of, 67</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the passage of the intuition of, into personal and presentative knowledge, 68</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his existence not proved but assumed and declared in Scripture, 68</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evidence of his existence inlaid in man's nature, 68</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge of, though intuitive may be explicated and confirmed by argument, 71</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the intuition of, supported by arguments probable and cumulative, 71</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the intuition of, explicated by reflection and reasoning, 72</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>arguments for existence of, classified, 72</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cosmological Argument for his existence, 73-75</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its proper statement, 73</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its defects, 73, 74</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its value, 74, 75</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Teleological Argument for his existence, 75-80</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its nature, 75-78</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its defects, 78-80</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its value, 80</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anthropological Argument for his existence, 80-85</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its nature, 80-83</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its defects, 84</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its value, 84, 85</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Historical Argument for his existence, 85</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Biblical Argument for his existence, 85</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ontological Argument for his existence, 85-89</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its three forms, 85, 86</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its defects, 87</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its value, 87-89</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evidence of his existence from the intellectual starting-point, 88</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evidence of his existence from the religious starting-point, 88</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the nature, decrees and works of, 243-370</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the attributes of, 243-306</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his acts and words arise from settled dispositions, 243</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his dispositions inhere in a spiritual substance, 243</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes, definition of, 244</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation of his attributes to his essence, 244-246</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes have an objective existence, 244</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes are distinguishable from his essence and from each other, 244</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded falsely as being of absolute simplicity, 244</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>he is a being infinitely complex, 245</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nominalistic notion, its error, 245</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes inhere in his essence, 245, 246</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not a compound of attributes, 245</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extreme realism, its danger, 245</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributes of, belong to his essence, 245</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes distinguished from personal distinctions in his Godhead, 246</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes distinguished from his relations to the world, 246</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>illustrated by intellect and will in man, 246</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes essential to his being, 246</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes manifest his essence, 246</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in knowing his attributes, we know the being to whom attributes belong, 246</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes, methods of determining, 246, 247</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rational method of determining, 247</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>three <hi rend='italic'>viæ</hi> of rational method of determining his attributes, 247</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Biblical method, 247</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes, how classified, 247-249</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>absolute or immanent, 247</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relative or transitive attributes, 247</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes, a threefold division of the relative or transitive, 248</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes, schedule of, 248</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>order in which they present themselves to the mind, 248</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his moral perfection involves relation of himself to himself, 249</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his absolute or immanent attributes, 249-275</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his spirituality, 249-254</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not matter, 249</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not dependent upon matter, 249</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the material universe, not his sensorium, 250</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his spirituality not denied by anthropomorphic Scriptures, 250</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pictures of him, degrading, 250</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>desire for an incarnate God, satisfied in Christ, 251</l>
<pb n='1081'/><anchor id='Pg1081'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his spirituality involves life and personality, 251, 252</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life as an attribute of, 251</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life in, has a subject, 251</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life in, not correspondence with environment, 251</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life in, is mental energy, the source of universal being and activity, 252</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personality, an attribute of, 252</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his personality, its content, 252</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his infinity, its meaning, 254</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his infinity, a positive idea, 254</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not involve identity with 'The All,', 255</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intensive rather than extensive, 255</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his infinity enables him to love infinitely the single Christian, 256</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his infinity qualifies his other attributes, 256</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what his infinity involves, 256-260</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his self-existence, what?, 256</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>he is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa sui</foreign>, 256</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his aseity, what?, 256</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exists by necessity of his own being, 257</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immutability, what?, 257</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to change, how explained, 257</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immutability secures his adaptation to the changing conditions of his children, 258</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immutability consistent with the execution in time of his eternal purposes, 258</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>permits activity and freedom, 258</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his unity, what?, 259</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>notion of more than one, self-contradictory and unphilosophical, 259</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his unity not inconsistent with Trinity, 259</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his unity, its lessons, 259</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his perfection, explanation of the term, 260</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>involves moral attributes, 260-275</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>himself, a sufficient object for his own activity, 260</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his truth, what?, 260</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immanent truth to be distinguished from veracity and faithfulness, 260</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>he is truth, as the truth that is known, 261</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his truth, a guarantee of revelation, and ground of eternal divine self-contemplation, 262</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his love, what?, 263</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immanent love to be distinguished from mercy and goodness, 263</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immanent love finds a personal object in his own perfection, 263</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immanent love, not his all-inclusive ethical attribute, 263</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immanent love, not a regard for mere being in general, 263</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immanent love, not a mere emotional or utilitarian affection, 264</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immanent love, rational and voluntary, 264</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immanent love subordinates its emotional element to truth and holiness, 265</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immanent love has its standard in his holiness, and a perfect object in the image of his own infinite perfections, 265</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immanent love, a ground of his blessedness, 265</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immanent love involves the possibility of his suffering on account of sin, which suffering is atonement, 266</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is passible, 266</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blessedness consistent with sorrow, 266</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a suffering being, a N. T. thought, 267</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his passibility, authors on, 267</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness, self-affirming purity, 268</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness, not its expression, justice, 269</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness is not an aggregate of perfections, but simple and distinct, 269</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness is not utilitarian self-love, 270</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness is neither love nor its manifestation, 271</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness is purity of substance, 273</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness is energy of will, 273</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness is God's self-willing, 274</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness is purity willing itself, 274</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness, authors on, 275</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relative or transitive attributes, 275-295</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his eternity, defined, 275</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his eternity, infinity in its relation to time, 276</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regards existing time as an objective reality, 277</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in what sense the past, present and future are to him 'one eternal now,', 277</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his immensity, what?, 278</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not under law of space, 279</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not in space, 279</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>space is in him, 279</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to him space has an objective reality, 279</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omnipresence, what?, 279</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omnipresence not potential but essential, 280</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in what sense he <q>dwells in Heaven,</q>, 280</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omnipresence mistaken by Socinian and Deist, 280</l>
<pb n='1082'/><anchor id='Pg1082'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his whole essence present in every part of his universe at the same time, 281</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omnipresence not necessary, but free, 283</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omniscience, what?, 283</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omniscience, from what deducible, 283</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its characteristics, as free from all imperfections, 283</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his knowledge direct, 283</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omniscience, Egyptian symbol of, 283</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his intense scrutiny, 283</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knows things as they are, 284</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foreknows motives and acts by immediate knowledge, 284</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his prescience not causative, 286</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omniscience embraces the actual and the possible, 286</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omniscience called in Scripture <q>wisdom,</q>, 286</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omnipotence, what?, 286</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omnipotence does not extend to the self contradictory or the contradictory to his own nature, 287</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has power over his own power, 287</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>can do all he will, not will do all he can, 287</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has a will-power over his nature-power, 287</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omnipotence implies power of self-limitation, 288</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omnipotence permits human freedom, 288</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his omnipotence humbles itself in the incarnation, 288</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes which have relation to moral being, 288-295</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his veracity and faithfulness, or transitive truth, 288</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his veracity secures the consistency of his revelations with himself, and with each other, 288</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his veracity secures the fulfilment of all promises expressed or implied, 289</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mercy and goodness, or transitive love, 289</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mercy, what?, 289</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his goodness, what?, 289</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his love finds its object in his own nature, 290</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his love, men its subordinate objects, 290</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his justice and righteousness or transitive holiness, 290</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his righteousness, what?, 291</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his justice, what?, 291</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his justice and righteousness not mere benevolence, nor so founded in the nature of things as to be apart from God, 291</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his justice and righteousness are revelations of his inmost nature, 292</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>do not bestow reward, 293</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>are devoid of passion and caprice, 294</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revulsion of his nature from impurity and selfishness, 294</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes, rank and relations, 295-303</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attributes related, 295</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his moral attributes more jealously guarded than his natural, 295</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his fundamental attribute is holiness, 296</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may be merciful, but must be holy, 296</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness put most prominently in Scripture, 296</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness, its supremacy asserted by conscience, 296</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness conditions exercise of other attributes, 297</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness, a principle in his nature which must be satisfied before he can redeem, 298</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holiness, the ground of moral obligation, 298-303</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>commands us to be holy on the ground of his own holiness, 302</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as holy, the object of the love that fulfils the law, 302</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holy will, Christ, our example, supremely devoted to, 302</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Doctrine of the Trinity in the One God, 304-352</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>see <ref target='Index-Trinity'>Trinity</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa sui</foreign>, 338</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is <q>self willing right,</q> 338</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relations sustained by, in virtue of personal distinctions, 343</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unity and threeness equally essential to, 346</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>independence and blessedness of, require Trinity, 347</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Doctrine of his Decrees, 353-370</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>definition of his decrees, itemized, 353-355</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evil acts, how objects of the decrees of, 354</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his permissive, not conditional agency, 354</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his decrees, how classified, 355</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his decrees referred to in Scripture and supported by reason, 355-359</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>can preserve from sin without violation of moral agency, 366</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his works, or the execution of his decrees, 371-464</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a demiurge working on eternal matter, 391</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his supreme end in creation, his own glory, 397-402</l>
<pb n='1083'/><anchor id='Pg1083'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>his own sake,</q> the fundamental reason of activity in, 399</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his self expression not selfishness, but benevolence, 400</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the only Being who can rightly live for himself, 401</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>that he will secure his end in creation, the great source of comfort, 401</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his rest, a new exercise of power, 411</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not <q>the soul of the universe,</q> 411</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the physical universe in no sense independent of, 413</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has disjoined in the free will of intelligent beings a certain amount of force from himself, 414</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the perpetual Observer, 415</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not work all, but all in all, 418</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented sometimes by Hebrew writers as doing what he only permits, 424</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his agency, natural and moral, distinguished, 441</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Fatherhood, 474-476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implied in man's divine sonship, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extends in a natural relation to all, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>provides the atonement, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>special, towards those who believe, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secures the natural and physical sonship of all men, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this natural sonship preliminary in some to a spiritual sonship, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>texts referring to, in a natural or common sense, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the larger sense, what it implies, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>natural, mediated by Christ, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>texts referring to, in a special sense, 474, 475</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to the race rudimental to the actual realization in Christ, 475</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extends to those who are not his children, 475</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>controversy on the doctrine mere logomachy, 475</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as announced by Jesus, a relation of love and holiness, 475</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if not true, then selfishness logical, 475</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this relationship realized in a spiritual sense through atoning and regenerating grace, 475</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>logical outcome of the denial of, 475, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>universal ground for accepting, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors upon, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>our knowledge of, conditioned by love, 519, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>God prays</q> fulfilled in Christ, 675</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reflected in universe, 714</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the immanent, is Christ, the Logos, 714</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exercises his creative, preserving and providential activity through Christ, 714</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Revealer of, is Christ, the Logos, 714</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personal existence grounded in him, 714</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all perceptions or recognitions of the objective through him, 714</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as Universal Reason, at the basis of our self consciousness and thinking, 714, 715</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is the common conscience, over finite, individual consciences, 715</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the eternal suffering of, on account of human sin, manifested in the historical sufferings of the incarnate Christ, 715</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the heart of, finally revealed in the historic sacrifice of Calvary, 716</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dealings of repentant sinner with, rather than with government, 741</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>salvation of all, in which sense desired by, 791, 792</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Golden Age, classic references to, 526</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Good deeds of an unregenerated man, how related to the tenor of his life, 814</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goodness, defined, 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goodness of God, witness to among heathen, 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gospel, testimony of, conformable with experience, 173</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its initial successes, a proof of its divine origin, 191</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>makes men moral, 863</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gospels, run counter to Jewish ideas, 156</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superior in literary character to contemporary writings, 158</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their relation to a historical Christ, 159</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>coincidence of their statements with collateral circumstances, 173, 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Gottesbewusstsein</foreign>, knowledge of God, 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Government, common, not necessary in church of Christ, 913</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Government, church, 903-926</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grace, supplements law as the expression of the whole nature of the lawgiver, 547, 548, 752</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>without works on the sinner's part, and without necessity on God's, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an expression of the heart of God, beyond law, and in Christ, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not abrogate but reinforces and fulfils law, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secures fulfilment of law by removing obstacles to pardon in the divine mind, and enabling man to obey, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has its law which subsumes but transcends <q>the law of sin and death,</q> 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has its place between the Pelagian and Rationalistic ideas of penalty, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a revelation partly of law, but chiefly of love, 549</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Pelagian idea of, 598</l>
<pb n='1084'/><anchor id='Pg1084'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>universal, according to Wesley, 603</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what, from the Arminian point of view, 605</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may afford sinners a better security for salvation than if they were Adams, 635</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a kingdom of, 775</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>men as sinners, its objects, 778</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>certain sinful men chosen to be recipients of special, 779</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>unmerited favor to sinners,</q> 779</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>more may be equitably bestowed on one man than on another, 779</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gracious Ability, 602-604</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guilt, defined, 614, 644</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how related to sin, 644, 645</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how incurred, 644</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not mere liability to penalty, 644</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constructive, has no place in divine government, 644</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to be distinguished from depravity, 645, 762</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is obligation to satisfy outraged holiness of God, 645</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sin, how set forth in Scripture, 645</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how Christ may have, without depravity, 645</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and depravity, <hi rend='italic'>reatus</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>macula</hi>, 645</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of race, how Christ bears, 646, 759</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be confounded with the consciousness of, 647</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first a relation to God, then to conscience, 647</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>administers its own anesthetics, 647</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>degrees of, 648-652</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>degrees of, set forth in Mosaic ritual, 648</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>casuistical refinements upon, not to be regarded, 648</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>variety of award in Judgment explained by degrees in, 648</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>measured by men's opportunities and powers, 649</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>measured by the energy of evil will, 649</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>measured by degrees of unreceptiveness in soul, 650</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of race, shared in by Christ, 759</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imparted and imputed to Christ, 759</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Habit and character, 1049</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Hands of the Living God,</q> what? 539</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hatred, what? 569</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heart, its meaning in Scripture, 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heathen, the, their virtues, what? 570</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may be saved who have not heard the gospel, 664, 843</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their religious systems corrupting, 666</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>whatever good in their religions, God in, 666</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in proportion to their culture, become despairing, 666</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>have an external revelation, 666</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instances of apparently regenerated, 843, 844</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heathenism, a negative preparation for redemption, 665, 666</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>partly a positive preparation for redemption, 665</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in it Christ as Logos or immanent God revealed himself in conscience and history, 665</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had the starlight of religious knowledge, 666</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their religions not the direct work of the devil, 666</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors on heathenism as an evangelical preparation, 666</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heaven, conception of, 1030</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>elements of its happy perfection, 1031</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rewards in, equal yet various, 1031</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is deliverance from defective physical organization and circumstances, 1031</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its rest, 1031</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how perfect on entering, 1031</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a city, 1031</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its love, 1031</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its activities, 1031</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is it a place as well as a state? 460, 1032</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probably a place, 460, 1032</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may be a state, 460</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the essential presence of Christ's body would imply place, 1032</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is it on a purified and prepared earth? 1032, 1033</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrews, genuineness and authorship, 152</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>anti-Ebionite, 669</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hell, essentially an inward condition, 460, 1034</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the outward corresponds with inward, 1034</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the pains of, not necessarily positive inflictions of God, 1035</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not an endless succession of sufferings, 1035</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its extent and scope, 1052</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compared with heaven, narrow and limited, 1052</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>only a spot, a corner in the universe, 1052</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henotheism, what? 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heredity, none in the race to predetermine self-consciousness, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some facts which heredity cannot explain, 471</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>often presents a product differing from both the producing agents, 492</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its influence in fiction, 492</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laws of, simply descriptions not explanations, 493</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>illustrations of heredity, 495, 496</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cause of variations in, discussed, 497</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Weismann's views of, 466, 497, 631</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>works for theology, 621, 632</l>
<pb n='1085'/><anchor id='Pg1085'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is God working in us, 624</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the law by which living beings tend to reproduce themselves in their descendants, 625</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the scientific attitude of mind in regard to, 632</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the opposing views of, illustrated, 632</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the conclusion best warranted by science in relation to, 632</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when modifications are transmitted by, 632</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may be intensified by individual action, 632</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has given new currency to doctrine of <q>Original Sin,</q> 636</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heresy, what? 800</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hingewandt zu</hi>, Dorner's translation of πρός in John 1:3, 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hipparion, the two-toed horse, 472</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holiness of God, see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy Spirit, 13, 337</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>organ of internal revelation, 13, 337</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recognized as God, 315</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possession of, 322, 343</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a person, 323</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his work other than that of Christ, 338, 339</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sin against, 648, 650-652</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation to Christ in his state of humiliation, 669, 697, 703</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>application of redemption through work of, 777-886</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Honestum</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>utile</foreign>, 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Host, Romish adoration of, 968</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Host,</q> Scriptural use of, 448</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humanity, capable of religion, 58</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>full concept of, marred in First Adam, realized in Second, 678</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its exaltation in Christ, the experience of his people, 707</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>justified in Christ's justification, 862</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humanity of Christ, 673-681</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>atonement as related to, 754-763</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>see <ref target='Index-Christ'>Christ</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humiliation of Christ, 701-706</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>see <ref target='Index-Christ'>Christ</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humility, what? 832</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyperphysical communication between minds perhaps possible, 1021</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>I Am,</q> as a Divine title, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Idea of God, origin of our, 52-70</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ideal human nature in Christ, 678</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Idealism, its view of revelation, 11, 12</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Idealism, Materialistic, 95-100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ideas have decided fate of world, 426</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Identity, Edwards's theory of, 607</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what it consists in, 1020-1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Idiomaticum genus</foreign>, 686</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Idle word,</q> 554</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Idolatry, 7, 133, 251, 457, 532, 968</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ignorance, sins of, 554, 649</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invincible, 967</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ignorantia legis neminem excusat</foreign>, 558</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Image, what it suggests, 335, 514</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and likeness, 520</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Image of God, in what it consisted, 514</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its natural element, 514</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its moral element, 514</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personality, an element in, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holiness, an element in, 515, 516</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its original righteousness, 517, 518</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not confined to personality, 519, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not consisting in a natural capacity for religion, 520-523</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reflects itself in physical form, 523</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in soul <foreign rend='italic'>proprie</foreign>, in body <foreign rend='italic'>significative</foreign>, 523</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subjects sensuous impulses to control of spirit, 523, 524</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives dominion over lower creation, 524</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secures communion with God, 524, 525</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had suitable surroundings and society, 525</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>furnished with tests of virtue, 526</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had associated with it, an opportunity of securing physical immortality, 527</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>combated by those who hold that civilization has proceeded from primitive savagery, 527-531</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>combated by those who hold that religion begins in fetichism, 531, 532</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Immortality'/>
<l>Immortality, metaphysical argument for, 984, 985</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teleological argument for, 986, 987</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ethical argument for, 987, 988</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>historical argument, 989</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>widespread belief in, 989, 990</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a general appetency for, 990</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idea of, congruous with our nature, 990</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors for and against, 991</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>maintained on Scriptural grounds, 991-998</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an inference from the intuition of the existence of God, 996</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the resurrection of Jesus Christ the most conclusive proof of, 997</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ taught, 997</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imprecatory Psalms, 231</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Imputatio metaphysica</hi>, 615</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Imputation'/>
<l>Imputation of Adam's sin to his posterity, 593-637</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taught in Scripture, 593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two questions demanding answer, 593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the meaning of the phrase, 354</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has a realistic basis in Scripture, 594</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two fundamental principles in, 595</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theories of New and Old Schools, 596, 597</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theories of, 597-637</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pelagian theory of, considered, 597-601</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Arminian theory of, considered, 601-606</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>New School theory of, considered, 606-612</l>
<pb n='1086'/><anchor id='Pg1086'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Federal theory of, considered, 612-616</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mediate theory of, 616-619</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Augustinian theory of, considered, 619-637</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grounded on organic unity of mankind, 619</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabular views, 628</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objections to Augustinian theory, 629-637</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors on, 637</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sin to Christ, grounded on a real union, 758</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ's righteousness to us, grounded on a real union, 805, 862</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indwelling of God, 693, 798</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Inexistentia</hi>, 333</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infant salvation, 602, 609</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of, 660-664</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is assured, 661</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its early advocates, 664</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leads to the conclusion that no one is lost solely for sin of nature, 664</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infanticide might have been encouraged by too definite assurances of infant salvation, 663</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infants, their death proves their sinful nature, 579</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>are regarded by some as animals, 579, 611, 957</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>are unregenerate and in a state of sin, 661</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relatively innocent, 661</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objects of special divine care, 661, 662</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>chosen by Christ to eternal life, 662</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>salvation assured to those who die prior to moral consciousness, 662</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in some way receive and are united to Christ, 662</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at final judgment among the saved, 662</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regeneration effected at soul's first view of Christ, 663</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inference, its nature and kinds, 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infinite, 9, 87, 254</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infinity of God, 254-256</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infirmity, sins of, 649, 650</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innate or connate ideas, what?, 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Insitæ vel potius innatæ cogitationes</hi>, 53</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Inspiration'/>
<l>Inspiration of Scripture, 196-242</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>definition of, 196-198</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined by result, 196</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may include revelation, 196</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may include illumination, 196</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>list of works on, 198</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proof of, 198</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presumption in favor of, 198</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the O. T., vouched for by Jesus, 199</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>promised by Jesus, 199, 200</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>claimed by the apostles, 200, 201</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attested by miracle or prophecy, 201</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>chief proof of, internal characteristics, 201</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theories of, 202-222</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Intuition-theory of, 202</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, its doctrinal connections, 202</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, uses only man's natural insight, 203</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, denies to man's insight, vitiated in matters of religion and morals, an indispensable help, 203</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, is self-contradictory, 203</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is <q>the growth of the Divine through the capacities of the human,</q>, 204</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, makes moral and religious truth purely subjective, 204</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, practically denies a God who is Truth and its Revealer, 204</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Illumination-theory of, 204</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, its doctrinal connections, 204</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, principal advocates of, 205</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in some cases amounted only to illumination, 206</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>more than an illumination, which cannot account for revelation of new truth, 206</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if illumination only, cannot secure writers from serious error, 207</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as mere illumination can enlighten truth already imparted but not impart it, 207</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Dictation-theory of, 208</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, its doctrinal connections, 208</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, its principal advocates, 208</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, post-reformation, 209</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, covers the few cases in which definite words were used with the command to write them down, 209</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, rests on an imperfect induction of Scriptural facts, 210</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, fails to account for the human element in Scripture, 210</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, spendthrift in means, as dictating truth already known to recipient, 210</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this theory of, reduces man's highest spiritual experience to mechanism, 210</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Dynamical theory of, 211-222</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from other theories of, 211</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no theory of, necessary to Christian faith, 211</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union of the Divine and human elements in, 212-222</l>
<pb n='1087'/><anchor id='Pg1087'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its mystery, the union of the divine and human, 212</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and hypnotic suggestion, 212</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the speaking and writing the words of God from within, in the conscious possession and exercise of intellect, emotion and will, 212</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pressed into service all the personal peculiarities, excellencies and defects of its subjects, 213</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>uses all normal methods of literary composition, 214</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may use even myth and legend, 214</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a gradual evolution, 214, 215</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the divine side of what on its human side is discovery, 215</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not guarantee inerrancy in things not essential to its purpose, 215</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in it God uses imperfect means, 215</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is divine truth in historical and individually conditioned form, 216</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>did not directly communicate the words which its subjects employed, 216</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has permitted no form of words which would teach essential error, 216</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>verbal, refuted by two facts, 216</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constitutes its Scriptures an organic whole, 217</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>develops a progressive system with Christ as centre, 217</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>furnishes, in the Bible as a whole, a sufficient guide to truth and salvation, 218</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>overstatement of, has made sceptics, 218</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constitutes Scripture an authority, but subordinate to the ultimate authority, Christ, 219</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>three cardinal principles regarding, 220</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>three common questions regarding, 220, 221</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objections to the doctrine of, 222-242</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, on the ground of errors in secular matters, 222</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to be erroneous in its science, 223</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reply to above allegation against, 223-226</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to be erroneous in its history, 226</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reply to above allegation against, 226-229</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to be erroneous in its morality, 230</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reply to above allegation against, 230-232</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to be erroneous in its reasoning, 232</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reply to above allegation against, 232, 233</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to be erroneous in quotation and interpretation, 234</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reply to above allegation against, 234, 235</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to be erroneous in its prophecy, 235</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reply to above allegation against, 235, 236</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>admits books unworthy of a place as inspired, 236</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reply to above allegation against, 236-238</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>admits as authentic portions of books written by others than the persons to whom they are ascribed, 238</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reply to above allegation against, 238-240</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>admits sceptical or fictitious narratives, 240</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reply to above allegation against, 240-242</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acknowledges non-inspiration of its teachers and writers, 242</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reply to above allegation against, 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Intercession'/>
<l>Intercession of Christ, 773-775</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-Christ'>Christ</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intercessors, saints on earth are, 775</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Intercommunicatio</hi>, 333</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intercommunion of the Persons in the Trinity, 332-334</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intermediate State, 998-1003</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the righteous, 988, 999</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the wicked, 999, 1000</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a sleep, 1000</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not purgatorial, 1000</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of incompleteness, 1002</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a state of thought, 1002</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sin if preferred in this more spiritual state becomes demoniacal, 1002</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some place the end of man's probation at the close of the, 1002</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intuition, 52, 53, 67, 72, 125, 499</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intuition-theory of inspiration, see <ref target='Index-Inspiration'>Inspiration</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intuitional theory of morals, 501</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconciled with the empirical theory, 501</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intuitions, 52, 53, 67, 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaiah, its composite character, 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Islam, 186, 427</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James, the apostle, his position on Justification, 851</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jefferson, Thomas, on a Baptist church as the truest form of democracy, 908</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jehovah, 256, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jesus, bowing at the name of, 969</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews, the only forward-looking people, 666</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>educated in three great truths, 666, 667</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>above truths presented by three agencies, 667, 668</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this education first of all by law, 667</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this education by prophecy, 667</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this education by judgment, 668</l>
<pb n='1088'/><anchor id='Pg1088'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effects of the exile upon, 668</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as propagators of the gospel, 668</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors on Judaism as a preparation for Christ, 668</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Job, the book of, when written, 241</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a dramatic poem, 240, 241</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John, gospel of, differs from synoptics in its account of Jesus, 143</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its genuineness, 151, 152</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compared with Revelation, 151, 152</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does its characteristic Logos doctrine necessitate a later date?, 320, 321</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judas, 884, 1043</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Judex damnatur cum nocens absolvitur</foreign>, 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judge, Christ the final, 1027, 1028</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judgment, the last, a final and complete vindication of God's righteousness, 1023, 1024</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its nature outward, visible, definite in time, 1024, 1025</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its object, the manifestation of character, and assignment of corresponding condition, 1025, 1026</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evidences of, and preparation for, already in the nature of man, 1026, 1027</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>single acts and words adduced in, why?, 1027, 1028</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the judge in, see preceding item, the subjects of, men and evil angels, 1028, 1029</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the grounds of, the law of God and grace of Christ, 1029</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>list of authors on, 1029</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justice of God, 290-295</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justification, involved in union with Christ, 805</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the doctrine of, 849-868</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 849</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>declarative and judicial, 849</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>held as sovereign by Arminians, 849, 855</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scriptural proof of, 849, 850</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its nature determined by Scriptural use of 'justify' and its derivatives, 850-854</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>James and Paul on, 851</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>includes remission of punishment, 854-856</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a declaration that the sinner is just or free from condemnation of law, 854</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is pardon or forgiveness as God is regarded as judge or father, 855</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is on the ground of union with Christ who has borne the penalty, 855</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>includes restoration to favor, 856</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>since it treats the sinner as personally righteous it must give him the rewards of obedience, 856</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is reconciliation or adoption as God is regarded as friend or father, 857</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this restoration rests solely on the righteousness of Christ to whom sinner is united by faith, 858</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its difficult feature stated, 859</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>believed on testimony of Scripture, 860</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the difficulty in, relieved by three considerations, 860</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is granted to a sinner in whose stead Christ has borne penalty, 860</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is bestowed on one who is so united to Christ as to have Christ's life dominating his being, 860</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is declared of one in whom the present Christ life will infallibly extirpate all remaining depravity, 860</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its ground is not the infusion into us of righteousness and love (Romish view), 861</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its ground is not the essential righteousness of Christ become the sinner's by faith, (Osiander) 861</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its ground is the satisfaction and obedience of Christ the head of a new humanity of which believers are members, 861</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is ours, not because Christ is in us, but because we are in Christ, 862</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to regeneration and sanctification delivers it from externality and immorality, 862, 863</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and sanctification, not different stages of same process, 863</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a declarative, as distinguished from the efficient acts of God's grace, regeneration and sanctification, 863</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gifts and graces accompaniments, not consequences of, 864</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>why <q>by faith</q> rather than other graces?, 864</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>produced efficiently by grace, meritoriously by Christ, instrumentally by faith, evidentially by works, 865</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as being complete at the moment of believing, is the ground of peace, 865</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is instantaneous, complete and final, 867</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not eternal in the past, 867</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in, God grants actual pardon for past sin, and virtual pardon for future sin, 867</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot be secured by future obedience, 868</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must be secured by accepting Christ and manifesting trust and submission by prompt obedience, 868</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>list of authors on, 868</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Justitia civilis</foreign>, 639</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Justus et justificans</foreign>, 753</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kalpa, 352</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karen tradition, 116</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kenosis, 701, 704, 705</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keri and Kethib, 309</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1089'/><anchor id='Pg1089'/>

<lg>
<l><q>Know,</q> its meaning in Scripture, 780</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knowledge includes faith as a higher sort of, 3, 4, 5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>analogy to one's nature or experience not necessary to, 7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is <q>recognition and classification,</q>, 7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mental image, not essential to, 7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of whole not essential to partial, and of a part, 8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may be adequate though not exhaustive, 8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>involves limitation or definition, 9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relative to knowing agent, 10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is of the thing as it is, 10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>though imperfect, valuable, 37</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>requires pre-supposition of an Absolute Reason, 61</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not ensure right action, 111, 460</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>aggravates, but is not essential to, sin, 558</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two kinds of, and <hi rend='italic'>scientia media</hi>, 357</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sins of, 649</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>final state of righteous one of, 1029</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koran, 115, 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kung-fu-tse, see <ref target='Index-Confucius'>Confucius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Language, difficulty of putting spiritual truths into, 35</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dead only living, 39</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not essential to thought, 216</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is the effect, not the cause of mind, 467</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Law, cause and force known without mental image, 7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is method, not cause, 76</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the transcript of God's nature, 293</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in general, 533-536</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its essential idea, 533</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its implications, 533</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first used of voluntary agents, 533</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its use in physics implicitly confesses a Supreme Will, 533</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its derivation in several languages, 533</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>because of its ineradicable implications, <q>method</q> has been suggested as a substitute, 533</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>definitions of, 533, 534</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot reign, 534</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its generality, 534</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deals in general rules, 534</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implies power to enforce, 534, 535</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>without penalty is advice, 535</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the case of rational and free agents implies duty and sanctions, 535</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expresses and demands nature, 535</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>formulates relations arising in nature, 535</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of God in particular, 536-547</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>elemental, 536-544</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>physical or natural, 536</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>moral law, 537</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>moral law, its implications, 537</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is discovered, not made, 538</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not constituted, but tested, by utility, 538</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of God, what?, 538</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the method of Christ, 539</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors upon, 539</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not arbitrary, 539</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not temporary, or provisional, 540</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not merely negative, 540</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as seen in Decalogue, 540</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not addressed to one part of man's nature, 540</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not outwardly published, 540, 541</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not limited by man's consciousness of it, 541</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not local, 541</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not modifiable, 541</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not violated even in salvation, 541</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ideal of human nature, 542</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reveals love and mercy mandatorily, 542, 549</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is all-comprehensive, 542</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is spiritual, 543</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a unit, 543</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not now proposed as a method of salvation, 543</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a means of discovering and developing sin, 543, 544</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reminds man of the heights from which he has fallen, 544</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as positive enactment, 544-547</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as shown in general moral precepts, 545</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as shown in ceremonial or special injunctions, 545</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its positive form a re-enactment of its elemental principles, 545</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the written, why imperfect?, 546</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Puritan mistake in relation to, 546</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to the grace of God, 547-549</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a general expression of God's will, 547</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a partial, not an exhaustive, expression of God's nature, 547</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pantheistic mistake in relation to, 547, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alone, leaves parts of God's nature to be expressed by gospel, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not, Christ is, the perfect image of God, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not abrogated by grace, but republished and re-enforced, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sin and death, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the manifestation of grace, combined with a view of the personal love of the Lawgiver, 549</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its all-embracing requirement, 572</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identical with the constituent principles of being, 629</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all-comprehending demand of harmony with God, 637</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Mosaic, inspired hope of pardon and access to God, 667</l>
<pb n='1090'/><anchor id='Pg1090'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its basis in the nature of God, 764</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a moral rule unchanging, 875</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>freedom from, what?, 876</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>believer not free from obligation to observe, 876</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a system of penalty, believer free from, 876</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a method of salvation, believer free from, 876</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as an outward and foreign compulsion, believer free from, 876</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a sliding scale graduated to one's moral condition, 877</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's, as known in conscience and Scripture, a ground of final judgment, 1029</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laws of knowing correspond to nature of things, 10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of theological thought, laws of God's thought, 10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of nature, not violated in miracle, 121</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of nature, act not merely singly, but in combination, 434, 435</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Laying-on of hands,</q> its significance, 920</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Letter-missive calling council of ordination, 922</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Lex</foreign>, its derivation, 533</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Licensure, its nature, 919</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Life contains promise and potency of every form of matter, 91</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not produced from matter, 93</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as it ascends, it differentiates, 240</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not definable, 251</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a mere process, 251</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>more than environmental correspondence, 251</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ascribed to Christ, 309</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ascribed to Holy Spirit, 315</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>animal, though propagated, not material, 495</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has power to draw from the putrescent material for its living, 677</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its various relations honored by being taken into union with Divinity in Christ, 682</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man's physical, conscious of a life within not subject to will, 799</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man's spiritual, conscious of life within its life, 799</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man's natural, preserved by God, much more his spiritual, 883</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christian, attains completeness in future, 981</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sinful, attains completeness in future, 981</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>book of,</q> the book of justification, 1029</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Lineamenta extrema</foreign>, 614</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Locutiones variæ, sed non contrariæ</foreign>; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>diversæ, sed non adversæ</foreign>, 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Logos'/>
<l>Logos, the whole, present in the man, Christ Jesus, 281</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>John's doctrine of the, radically different from Philo's, 320, 321</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>John's doctrine of the, related to the <q>memra</q> doctrine, 320</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of the, authorities on, 321</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>significance of term, 335</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the pre-incarnate, granted to men a natural light of reason and conscience, 603</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purged of depravity that portion of human nature which he assumed in Incarnation, in the very act of taking it, 677</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>during earthly life of Jesus existed outside of flesh, 704</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the whole present in Christ, and yet present everywhere else, 704</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>can suffer on earth, and yet reign in heaven at same time, 714</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his surrender of independent exercise of divine attributes, how best conceived, 705</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his part in evangelical preparation, 711</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Lord of Hosts,</q> its significance, 448</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lord's Day, 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Lords-Supper'/>
<l>Lord's Supper, 959-980</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lord's Supper and Baptism, historical monuments, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Love, necessary to right use of reason with regard to God, 3, 29, 519, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its loss obscures rational intuitions of God, 67</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's, nature cannot prove it, 84</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's immanent, what?, 263</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be confounded with mercy and goodness, 265</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's, finds a personal object within the Trinity, 285</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constitutes a ground of divine blessedness, 285</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's transitive, what?, 289</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's transitive, is mercy and goodness, 289</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinct from holiness, 290, 567</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributed to Christ, 309</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributed to Holy Spirit, 316</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revealed in grace rather than in law, 548</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 567</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to God, all-embracing requirement of law, 572</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eternity of God's, an effective element in appeal, 788</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's, fixed on sinners of whom he knows the worst, 788</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's unchanging, 788</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's, has dignity, 1051</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brotherly, in heaven implies knowledge, 1031</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Maat</hi>, the Egyptian goddess, 1024</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maccabees, First, no direct mention of God in, 309</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1091'/><anchor id='Pg1091'/>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magister sententiarum</foreign>, 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magnetism, personal, what? 820</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Majestaticum genus</foreign>, 686</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malice, what? 569</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Malum metaphysicum</foreign>, what? 424</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Man'/>
<l>Man, in what sense supernatural, 26</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>furnishes highest type of intelligence and will in nature, 79</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as to intellect and freedom, not eternal <hi rend='italic'>a parte ante</hi>, 81</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his intellectual and moral nature, implies an intellectual and moral author, 81</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his moral nature proves existence of a holy Lawgiver, 82</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his emotional and voluntary nature proves the existence of a Being who may be a satisfying object of human affection and end of human activity, 83</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recognizes in God, not his like, but his opposite, 83</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistakes as to his own nature lead him into mistakes as to the First Cause, 84, 253</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his consciousness, Royce's view, 99</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his will above nature, 121</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a concave glass towards God, 252</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>can objectify self, 252</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is self-determining, 252</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not explicable from nature, 411</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a spiritually reproductive agent, yet God begets, 418</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a creation, and child of God, 465-476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his creation a fact of Scripture, 465</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exists by creative acts of God, 465</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>though result of evolution, yet originating agency of God needed, 465</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>whether mediately or immediately created Scripture does not explicitly state, 465</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the true doctrine of evolution consistent with the Scriptural doctrine of creation, 466</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>certain psychological human endowments cannot have come from the brute, 466</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's breathing into men was such a re-inforcement of the processes of life as turned the animal into man, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and brute, both created by the immanent God, the former comes to his status not <hi rend='italic'>from</hi> but <hi rend='italic'>through</hi> the latter, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the beginnings of his conscious life, 467</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some simple distinctions between man and brute, 467, 468</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if of brute ancestry, yet the offspring of God, 469</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scripture teaches that man's nature is the creation of God, 469</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relations to animals, authors upon, 469</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>immediate creation of his body not forbidden by comparative physiology, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>that his physical system is descended by natural generation from the simiæ, an irrational hypothesis, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as his soul was an immediate creation of God, so, in this sense, was his body also, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not degenerate as we travel back in time, 471</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no natural process accounts for his informing soul nor for the body informed by that soul, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the laws of development followed in man's origin from a brute ancestry are but methods of God, and proofs of his creatorship, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>comes upon the scene not as a brute but as a self-conscious, self-determining being, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his original and new creation, both from within, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an emanation of that Divine Life of which the brute was a lower manifestation, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his nature not an undesigned result of atheous evolution but the efflux of the divine personality, 473</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>natural selection may account for man's place <hi rend='italic'>in</hi> nature, but not for his place as a spiritual being above nature, 473</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his intellectual and moral faculties have only an adequate cause in the world of spirits, 473</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apart from the controlling action of a higher intelligence, the laws of the material universe insufficient for his production, 473</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his brute ancestry, list of authors on, 473, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his racial unity, 476-483</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his racial unity, a fact of Scripture, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his racial unity at foundation of certain Pauline doctrines, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his racial unity, the ground of natural brotherhood, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the pre-Adamite, 476, 477</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his racial unity, sustained by history, 477, 478</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his racial unity, sustained by philology, 478, 479</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his racial unity, sustained by psychology, 479</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his racial unity, sustained by physiology, 480, 483</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a single species under several varieties, 480</l>
<pb n='1092'/><anchor id='Pg1092'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unity of species of, argues unity of origin, 481</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>according to Agassiz from eight centres of origin, 481</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his racial unity, consistent with all existing physical varieties, 481, 482</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>physiological change in, illustrated, 482</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>originally greater plasticity,</q> 482</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his racial unity, authorities on, 482, 483</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the essential elements of his nature, 483-488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the dichotomous theory of his nature, 483, 484</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the dichotomous theory of, supported by consciousness, 483</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the dichotomous theory of, supported by Scripture, 483, 484</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the trichotomous theory of his nature, 484-488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his ψυχή and πνεῦμα, 484</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his spirit and soul, texts on, 484</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>trichotomous theory of his nature, element of truth in, 484</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the trichotomous theory of his nature untenable, 485, 486</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the true relation of πνεῦμα and ψυχή in his nature, 486-488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is different in kind from the brute, though possessed of certain powers in common with it, 486</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>since spirit is soul when in connection with the body, soul cannot be immortal unless with spiritual body, 486</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the trichotomous theory of the nature of, untenable on psychological grounds, 486</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a true view of the spiritual nature of, refutes six errors, 486, 487</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some who have held the trichotomous view of, 487</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his body, why honorable? 488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has been provided with a fleshly body, for two suggested reasons, 488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>origin of his soul, 488-497</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the theory of the pre-existence of his soul, 488-491</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the advocates, ancient and modern, of this theory of soul pre-existence, 488, 489</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the truth at the basis of soul pre-existence, 488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the theory of soul pre-existence, founded on an illusion of memory, 488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explanations of this illusion, 488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the theory of the soul's pre-existence, without Scriptural warrant, 489, 490</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if his soul was conscious and personal in the pre-existent state,
why is recollection even of important decisions so defective? 490</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the pre-existence theory of the soul of, is of no theological assistance, 490</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Müller's view of pre-existence stated and examined, 490, 491</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the creatian theory of his soul, 491-493</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its advocates, 491</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scripture does not teach that God immediately creates his soul, 491</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creatianism repulsively false as representing him as not father of his offspring's noblest part, 492</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his individuality, how best explained, 492</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the creatian theory of his birth makes God the author of sin, 493</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the creatian theory of his birth, certain mediating modifications of, 493</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the traducian theory of his birth, 493-497</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the traducian theory, its advocates, 493</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the traducian theory explained, 494</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the traducian theory best accords with Scripture, 494</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the traducian theory is favored by the analogy of animal and vegetable life, 495</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the traducian theory supported by the transmission of physical, mental, and moral characteristics, 495, 496</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the traducian theory embraces the element of truth in the creatian theory in that it holds to a divine concurrence in the development of the human species, 497</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his moral nature, 497-513</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the powers which enter into his moral nature, 497</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conscience defined, 498</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has no separate ethical faculty, 498</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conscience discriminative and impulsive, 498</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conscience distinguished from related mental processes, 499</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conscience the moral judiciary of the soul, 500</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conscience an echo of God's voice, 501</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has the authority of the personal God, of whose nature law is but a transcript, 502-504</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his will, 504-513</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his will defined, 504, 505</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his will and the other faculties, 505</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his will and permanent states, 505, 506</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his will and motives, 506, 507</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his will and contrary choice, 507, 508</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his will and his responsibility, 509, 510</l>
<pb n='1093'/><anchor id='Pg1093'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his responsibility for the inherited selfish preferences of his will, its Scriptural explanation, 510</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his natural bent of will to evil so constant, inveterate, and powerful that only regeneration can save him from it, 510</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the hurtful nature of a deterministic theory of his will, 511-513</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and his will, authors upon, 513</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his original state, 514-532</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his original state described only in Scripture, 514</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>list of authors on his original state, 514</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>essentials of his original state, 514-523</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made <q>in the image of God,</q> what implied?, 514</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made in natural likeness to God or personality, 514</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made in moral likeness to God or holiness, 514</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the elements in his original likeness to God, more clearly explicated, 514, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>indwelt by the Logos or divine Reason, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>never wholly loses <q>the image of God,</q>, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a minor sense <q>gods</q> and <q>partakers of the divine nature,</q>, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has <q>a deeper depth</q> rooted and grounded in God, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>created a personal being with power to know and determine self, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his natural likeness to God inalienable and the capacity that makes redemption possible, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his personality further defined, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>should reverence his humanity, 515, 516</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>originally possessed such a direction of affections and will as constituted God the supreme end of his being, and himself a finite reflection of God's moral attributes, 517</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his chief endowment, holiness, 517</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his original righteousness as taught in Scripture, 517</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in what the dignity of his human nature consists, 517</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his original righteousness not the essence of his human nature, 518</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his original righteousness not a gift from without and after creation, 518</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his original righteousness a tendency of affections and will to God, 518</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his original righteousness propagable to descendants, 518</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his likeness to God, more than the perfect mutual adjustment of his spiritual powers, 519</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his fall assigned by some to pre-existent state, 519</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>the image of God</q> in, was, some say, merely the possibility (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Anlage</foreign>) of real likeness, 519</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his individual will not the author of his condition of sin or of holiness, 519</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>since he originally knew God, must have loved God, 519, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>primal <q>image of God,</q> not simply ability to be like God, but actual likeness, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if morally neutral, is a violator of God's law, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the original <q>image of God</q> in, more than capacity for religion, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scholastics and the Romanist church distinguished between <q>image</q> and <q>likeness</q> as applied to his first estate, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his nature at creation, according to Romanism, received a <hi rend='italic'>donum superadditum</hi> of grace, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his progress from the state <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in puris naturalibus</foreign> to the state <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>spoliatus a nudo</foreign>, as the Romish church teaches, pictorially stated, 521</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Romish theory as to his original state considered in detail, 520-523</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>results of his original possession of the divine image, 523-525</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his physical form reflects his original endowment, 523</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>originally possessed an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>æquale temperamentum</foreign> of body and spirit which, though physically perfect, was only provisional, 523</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had dominion over the lower creation, 524</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enjoyed communion with God, 524, 525</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>concomitants of his possession of the divine image, 525-532</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his surroundings and society fitted to afford happiness and help, 525, 526</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wife and her creation, 525</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>was perhaps hermaphrodite, 526</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his garden, Eden, 526</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>provisions for trying his virtue, 526, 527</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opportunity for securing for himself physical immortality, 527</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the first, had he maintained his integrity, would have been developed and transformed without undergoing death, 527</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Scriptural view of his original state opposed by those who hold a prehistoric development of the race from savagery to civilization, 527</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the originally savage condition of, an ill-founded assumption, 527-531</l>
<pb n='1094'/><anchor id='Pg1094'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Scriptural account of his original state opposed by those who hold the Positivist theory of the three consecutive conditions of knowledge, 531</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the assumption that he must hold fetichism, polytheism, and monotheism in successive steps, if he progresses religiously, contradicted by facts, 531, 532</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>monotheistic before polytheistic, 531, 532</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in some stocks never practiced fetichism, 532</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the earliest discovered sepulchral remains of, prove by presence of food and weapons an advance upon fetichism, 532</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his theologic thought not transient but rooted in his intuitions and desires, 532</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in what sense a law unto himself, 539</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as finite needs law, 542</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a free being needs moral law, 542</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a progressive being needs an ideal and infinite standard of attainment, 542</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>according to Scripture responsible for more than his merely personal acts, 634</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not wholly a spontaneous development of inborn tendencies, 649</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ideal, realized only in Christ, 678, 679</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his reconciliation to God, 777-885</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his perfection reached only in the world to come, 981</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manhood of Christ, ideal, 678, 679</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manichæanism, 382, 670</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moriolatry, invocation of saints, and transubstantiation, origin of, 673</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage, a type of human and divine nature in Christ, 693</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>'Mary, mother of God,', 671, 686</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Material force as little observable as divine agency, 8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>organism, not necessarily a hindrance to activity of spirit, 1021</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Materialism, idealism, and pantheism, arise from desire after scientific unity, 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Materialism, what?, 90</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>element of truth in, 90</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objection to, from intuition, 92</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objection to, from mind's attributes, 92, 93</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot explain the psychical from the physical, 93</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>furnishes no sufficient cause for highest phenomena of universe, 94</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>furnishes no evidence of consciousness in others, 94, 95</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sadducean, denies resurrection of body, 1018</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recent, its services to proper views of body, 1018</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Materialistic Idealism, 95-100</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its definition, 95</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its development, 95-97</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defective in its definition of matter, 97</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defective in its definition of mind, 97, 98</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opposed to the imperative assumptions of non-empirical, transcendent knowledge of things-in-themselves, 98</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>however modified, cumbered with the difficulties of pure materialism, 98, 99</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a view of, held by many Christian thinkers, 99, 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mathematics, a disclosure of the divine nature, 261</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crystallized, the heavens are, 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matter, regarded as atoms which have force as a universal and inseparable property, 90, 91</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in its more modern aspect, a manifestation of force, 91</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Tyndall and Crookes deliverances regarding, 91</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mind intuitively regarded as different from it in kind, and higher in rank, 92</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to be regarded as secondary and subordinate to mind, 93</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and mind, relations between, 93, 94</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does it provide <q>the needful objectivity for God</q>?, 347</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its eternity not disprovable by reason, 374</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not stuff that emanated from God, 385</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not stuff, but an activity of God, 385</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>according to Schelling, <foreign rend='italic'>esprit gelé</foreign>, 386</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its continuance dependent on God, 413</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made by God, and, therefore, pure, 560</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its capacities, as subservient to spirit, inestimable, 1021, 1022</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Memory, its impeccability in the case of the apostles, secured by promised Spirit, 207</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a preparation for the final judgment, 1026</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of an evil deed, becomes keener with time, 1029</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Memra</hi>, relation to Johannine Logos, 320</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Mendacium officiosum</foreign>, 262</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mennonites, 970</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mens humana capax divinæ</foreign>, 212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mens rea</foreign>, essential to crime, 554</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mercy, in the God of nature, some indications which point to, 113</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>optional, 271, 296, 297</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 289</l>
<pb n='1095'/><anchor id='Pg1095'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine, a matter of revelation, 296</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>election a matter of, 779</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Messiah, 321, 667, 668</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metaphysical generation of the soul, 493</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Military theory of atonement, 747</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Millennium, 1008-1015</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mind, has no parts, yet divisible, 9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its organizing instinct, 15, 16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives both final and efficient cause, 76</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recognizes itself as another and higher than the material organization it uses, 92</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its attributes and itself different in kind and higher in rank than matter, 92, 93</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not transformed physical force, 93</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the only substantive thing in the universe, all else is adjective, 94</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unsatisfactorily defined as a <q>series of feelings aware of itself,</q>, 97</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Absolute, not conditioned as the finite mind, 104</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>carnal,</q> its meaning, 592</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minister, his chief qualification, 17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relation to church work, 898</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forfeiture of his standing as, 923, 924</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miracle, a preliminary definition, 117</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>modified definition suggested by Babbage, 117, 118</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>signality</q> must be preserved in definition of, 118</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preferable definition, 118, 119</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>never regarded in Scripture as an infraction of law, 119</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>natural processes may be in, 119</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the attitude of some theologians towards, irrational, 120</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a number of opinions upon, presented, 120</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possibility of, 121-123</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not beyond the power of a God dwelling in and controlling the universe, shown in some observations, 121-123</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possibility of, doubly strong to those who give the Logos or Divine Reason his place in his universe, 122</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possible on Lotzean view of universe, 123</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possible because God is not far away, 123</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possible because of the action and reaction between the world and the personal Absolute, 123</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a presumption against, 124</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presupposes, and derives its value from, law, 124</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a uniformity of nature, inconsistent with miracle, non-existent, 124</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no one is entitled to say <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> that it is impossible (Huxley), 124</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>but the higher stage as seen from the lower, 125</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when the efficient cause gives place to the final cause, 125</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exists because the uniformity of nature is of less importance in the sight of God than the moral growth of the human spirit, 125</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>the greatest I know, my conversion</q> (Vinet), 125</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>our view of, determined by our belief in a moral or a non-moral God, 126</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is extraordinary, never arbitrary, 126</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a question of power, but of rationality and love, 126</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implies self-restraint and self-unfolding, 126</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accompanied by a sacrifice of feeling on the part of Christ, 126</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probability of, greater from point of view of ethical monism, 126</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a work in which God lovingly limits himself, 126</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probability of, drawn from the concessions of Huxley, 127</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the amount of testimony necessary to prove a, 127</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hume's misrepresentation of the abnormality of, 127</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hume's argument against, fallacious, 127</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evidential force of, 128-131</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accompanies and attests new communications from God, 128</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its distribution in history, 128, 129</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its cessation or continuance, 128, 132, 133</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>certifies directly not to the truth of a doctrine, but of a teacher, 129</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must be supported by purity of life and doctrine, 129</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to see in all nature the working of the living God removes prejudice against, 130</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the revelation of God, not the proof of that revelation, 130</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not lose its value in the process of ages, 130</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the resurrection sustains the authority of Christ as a teacher, 130</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ's resurrection, is it <q>an obsolete picture of an eternal truth</q>?, 130</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ's resurrection, has complete historical attestation, 130, 131</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ's resurrection, not explicable by the <hi rend='italic'>swoon-theory</hi> of Strauss, 131</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ's resurrection, not explicable by the <hi rend='italic'>spirit-theory</hi> of Keim, 131</l>
<pb n='1096'/><anchor id='Pg1096'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ's resurrection, not explicable by the <hi rend='italic'>vision-theory</hi> of Renan, 131</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ's resurrection, its three lessons, 131</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the counterfeit, 132</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>only a direct act of God a, 132</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the counterfeit, attests the true, 132</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how the false, may be distinguished from the true, 132, 133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miracles as attesting Divine Revelation, 117-133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammedanism, 186, 347, 427</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molecular movement and thought, 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molecules, manufactured articles, 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molluscs, their beauty inexplicable by <q>natural selection,</q>, 471</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monarchians, 327</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monism presents that deep force, in which effects, psychical and bodily, find common origin, 69</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>there must be a basal, 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monism, Ethical, defined, 105</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consistent with the teachings of Holy Writ, 105</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the faith of Augustine, 105</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the faith of Anselm, 105, 106</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>embraces the one element of truth in pantheism, 106</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is entirely consistent with ethical fact, 106</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is Metaphysical Monism qualified by Psychological Monism, 106</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is supplanting Dualism in philosophic thought, 106</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it rejects the two main errors of pantheism, 107, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it regards the universe as a finite, partial, and progressive revelation of God, 107, 108</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it regards matter as God's limitation under law of necessity, 107</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it regards humanity as God's self-limitation under law of freedom, 107</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it regards incarnation and atonement as God's self-limitation under law of grace, 107</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regards universe as related to God as thought to the thinker, 107</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regards nature as the province of God's pledged and habitual causality, 107</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is the doctrine largely of the poets, 107, 108</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guarantees individuality and rights of each portion of universe, 108</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in moral realm estimates worth by the voluntary recognition and appropriation of the divine, 108</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not, like pantheism, involve moral indifference to the variations observed in universe, 108</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not regard saint and sensualist, men and mice as of equal value, 108</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it regards the universe as a graded and progressing manifestation of God's love for righteousness and opposition to wrong, 108</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it recognizes the mysterious power of selfhood to oppose the divine law, 108</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it recognizes the protective and vindicatory reaction of the divine against evil, 108</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it gives ethical content to Spinoza's apophthegm, 'all things serve,', 108</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it neither cancels moral distinctions, nor minifies retribution, 108</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recognizes Christ as the Logos of God in its universal acceptance, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recognizes as the Creator, Upholder, and Governor of the universe, Him who in history became incarnate and by death made atonement for human sin, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rests on Scriptural statements, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secures a Christian application of modern philosophical doctrine, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives a more fruitful conception of matter, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>considers nature as the omnipresent Christ, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents Christ as the unifying reality of physical, mental and moral phenomena, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to pantheism and deism, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>furnishes a foundation for new interpretation in theology and philosophy, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>helps to acceptance of Trinitarianism, 109</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that while the natural bond uniting to God cannot be broken, the moral bond may, 109, 110</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how it interprets <q>rejecting</q> Christ, 110</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enables us to understand the principle of the atonement, 110</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>strengthens the probability of miracle, 126</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that God is pure and perfect mind that passes beyond all phenomena and is their ground, 255</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that <q>that which hath been made was life in him,</q> Christ, 311</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that in Christ all things <q>consist,</q> hold together, as cosmos rather than chaos, 311</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that gravitation, evolution, and the laws of nature are Christ's habits, and nature but his constant will, 311</l>
<pb n='1097'/><anchor id='Pg1097'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that in Christ is the intellectual bond, the uniformity of law, the unity of truth, 311</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that Christ is the principle of induction, the medium of interaction, and the moral attraction of the universe, reconciling all things in heaven and earth, 311</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that God transcendent, the Father, is revealed by God immanent, the Son, 314</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that Christ is the life of nature, 337</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that creation is thought in expression, reason externalized, 381</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches a dualism that holds to underground connections of life between man and man, man and nature, man and God, 386</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that the universe is a life and not a mechanism, 391</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that God personally present in the wheat makes it grow, and in the dough turns it into bread, 411</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that every man lives, moves, and has his being in God, and that whatever has come into being, whether material or spiritual, has its life only in Christ, 413</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dei voluntas est rerum natura</foreign>,</q>, 413</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that nothing finite is only finite, 413</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its further teaching concerning natural forces and personal beings, 413, 414, 418, 419</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>allows of <q>second cause,</q>, 416</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monogenism, modern science in favor of, 480</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monophysites, 672</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-Eutychians'>Eutychians</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monotheism, facts point to an original, 56, 531</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hebrew, preceeds polytheistic systems of antiquity, 531, 532</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>more and more evident in heathen religions as we trace them back, 531, 532</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an original, authors on, 531, 532</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montanists, 304</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montanus, 712</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moral argument for the existence of God, the designation criticized, 81</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>faculty, its deliverances, evidences of an intelligent cause, 82</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>freedom, what?, 361</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nature of man, 497-513</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>likeness to himself, how restored by God, 518</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>law, what?, 537-544</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>law, man's relations to, reach beyond consciousness, 594</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>government of God, recognizes race-responsibilities, 594</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>union of human and divine in Christ, 671</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>analogies of atonement, 716</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evil, see <ref target='Index-Sin'>Sin</ref>.</l>
<anchor id='Index-Moral-Obligation'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>obligation, its grounds determined, 298-303</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>judgments, involve will, 841</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morality, Christian, a fruit of doctrine, 16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of N. T., 177, 178</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christian, criticized by Mill, 179</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>heathen systems of, 179-186</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Bible, progressive, 230</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mere insistence on, cannot make men moral, 863</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Morning stars,</q>, 445</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Mother of God,</q>, 681</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Motive, not cause but occasion, 360, 506</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man never acts without or contrary to, 360</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a ground of prediction, 360</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>influences, without infringing on free agency, 360</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the previously dominant, not always the impulsive, 360</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Motives, man can choose between, 360</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>persuade but never compel, 362, 506, 649</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not wholly external to mind influenced by them, 506, 817</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lower, sometimes seemingly appealed to in Scripture, 826, 827</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muratorian Canon, 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Music, reminiscent of possession lost, 526</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mystic, 31, 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysticism, true and false, 32</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Mystik</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>Mysticismus</foreign>, 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myth, its nature, 155</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as distinguished from <emph>saga</emph> and legend, 155</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>the Divine Spirit can avail himself of</q> (Sabatier), 155</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>'may be made the medium of revelation' (Denney), 214</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a falsehood, 155, 214</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>early part of Genesis may be of the nature of a, 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myth-theory of the origin of the gospels (Strauss), 155-157</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>described, 155, 156</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objected to, 156, 157</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors on, 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Nachwirkung</foreign> and <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Fortwirkung</foreign>, 776</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Name, in my,</q>, 807</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Names of God, the five Hebrew,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ewald on, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nascimur, pascimur</foreign>, 972</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1098'/><anchor id='Pg1098'/>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Natura</foreign>, 392</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Natura enim non nisi parendo vincitur</foreign>, 541</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Natura humana in Christo capax divinæ</foreign>, 694</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Natura naturans</foreign> (Spinoza), 244, 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Natura naturata</foreign> (Spinoza), 244, 287, 700</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Naturæ minister et interpres</foreign>, 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natural = psychical, 484</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natural insight as to source of religious knowledge, 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natural law, advantages of its general uniformity, 124</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>events aside from its general fixity to be expected if moral ends require, 125</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life, God's gift of, foreshadows larger blessings, 289</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>realism, and location of mind in body, 280</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revelation supplemented by Scripture, 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natural Selection, artificial after all, 93</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its teaching, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is partially true, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not a complete explanation of the history of life, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives no account of origin of substance or variations, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the <emph>survival</emph> does not explain the <emph>arrival</emph> of the fittest, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not explain the sudden and apparently independent appearance of important geologic forms, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>certain entomological and anatomical facts are inexplicable upon the theory of, 471</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fails to explain the beauty in lower forms of life, 471</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no species has as yet been produced by either artificial or, 472</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not necessarily make the idea of Creator superfluous, 473</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may account for man's place in, but not above, nature, 473</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>requires, according to Wallace, a superior intelligence to guide in definite direction or for special purpose, 473</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a list of authors upon, 474</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>atheistically taught, is election with hope and pity left out, 784</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natural theology, what?, 260</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nature, its usual sense, 26, 121</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its proper sense, 26, 121</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its witness to God, outward and inward, 26</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>argument for God's existence from change in, 73-75</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>argument for God's existence from useful collocation in, 75-80</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mill's indictment of, 78</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apart from man, cannot be interpreted, 79</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not assure us of God's love and provision for the sinner, 113, 114</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by itself furnishes a presumption against miracles, 124</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as synonym of substance, 243</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>according to Schleiermacher, 287</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its forces, dependent and independent, 414</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the brute submerged in, 468</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, why it should be reverenced, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in what sense sin a, 518</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as something inborn, 518, 577, 578</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the race has a corrupted nature, 577-582</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sinful acts and dispositions explained by a corrupt, 577</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a corrupt, belongs to man from first moment of his being, 578</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a corrupt, underlies man's consciousness, 578</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a corrupt, which cannot be changed by a man's own power, 578</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a corrupt, the common heritage of the race, 578</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>designates, not substance, but corruption of substance, 578</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how responsible for a depraved, which one did not personally originate, 593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, Pelagian view of, 598</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, semi-Pelagian view of, 598</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, Augustinian view of, 598</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, organic view of, 600</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, atomistic view of, 600</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the whole human race once a personality in Adam, 629</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, can apostatize but once, 630</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, totally depraved, 637-639</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man can to a certain extent modify his, 642</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sin of, and personal transgression, 648</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impersonal human, 694</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and person, 694, 695</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Robinson's definition of, 695</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, is it to develop into new forms, 986</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Nature of things, in the,</q> the phrase examined, 357</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nazarenes, 669</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-Ebionites'>Ebionites</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebular hypothesis, 395</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Necessitarian philosophy, correct for the brute, 468</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Negation, involves affirmation, 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Neron Kaisar</foreign>, and <q>666</q>, 1009</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nescience, divine, 286</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nestorians, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neutrality, moral, never created by God, 521</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>moral, a sin, 521</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New England theology, 48, 49</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Haven theology, 49</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1099'/><anchor id='Pg1099'/>

<lg>
<l>New School theology, 48, 49, 606</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its definition of holiness, 271, 272</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its definition of sin, how it differs from that of Old School, 549, 550</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ignores the unconscious and subconscious elements in human character, 550</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its watchword as to sin, 595</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its theory of imputation, an evasion, 596</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its theory of imputation explained, 606, 607</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>development of its theory of inspiration, 607, 608</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>modifications of view within, 608</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contradicts Scripture, 608, 609</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its advocates cannot understand Paul, 609</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rests upon false philosophical principles, 609, 610</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impugns the justice of God, 610, 611</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inconsistent with facts, 611, 612</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its aim that of all the theories of imputation, 612</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nihil in intellectu nisi quod ante fuerit in sensu</foreign>, 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nineveh, winged creatures of, 449</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nirvana</foreign>, 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Noblesse oblige</foreign>, 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nomina</foreign> become <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>numina</foreign>, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nominalism inconsistent with Scripture, 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nominalist notion of God's nature, 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Non-apostolic writings recommended by apostles, 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Non-inspiration, seeming, of certain Scriptures, 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non pleni nascimur</foreign>, 597</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Nothing, creation out of,</q>, 372</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Notitia</foreign>, an element in faith, 837</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Noumenon</foreign> in external and internal phenomena, 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nullus in microcosmo spiritus, nullus in macrocosmo Deus</foreign>, 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obduracy, sins of, incomplete and final, 650</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obedience, Christ's active and passive, 749, 770</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Obey,</q> not the imperative of religion, 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obligation to obey law based on man's original ability, 541</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Offences between men, 766</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>between church members, 924, 925</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Old School theology, 49, 606, 607</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omission, sins of, 554, 648</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omne vivum e vivo</foreign> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex ovo</foreign>), 389</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnia mea mecum porto</foreign>, 1032</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omnipotence of God, 286-288</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omnipresence of God, 279-282</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omnipresent, how God might cease to be, 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omniscience of God, 282-286</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>One eternal now,</q> how to be understood, 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ontological argument for existence of God, 85-89</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-God'>God</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Optimism, 404, 405</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oracles, ancient, 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ordinances'/>
<l>Ordinances of the church, 929-980</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ordination'/>
<l>Ordination of church officers, 918-929</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ordo salutis</foreign>, 794</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Organic and organized substances, 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Organic, the, and atomistic views of human nature, 600</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Original <q>image of God</q> in man, its nature, 514-523</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Original natural likeness to God, or personality, 515, 519, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>moral likeness to God, man's, or holiness, 516-518</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>righteousness, what? 517, 518</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge of God, man's, implied a direction of the affections and will toward God, 519</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sin, as held by Old School theologians, 49</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two-fold problem of, 593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its definition, 594, 595</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two principles fundamental to consideration of, 595</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a correct view of race-responsibility essential to a correct view of, 595</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some facts in connection with the guilt of, 596</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>substance of Scriptural teaching concerning, 625-627</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a misnomer, if applied to any theory but that of its author, Augustine, 636</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no one finally condemned merely on account of, 596, 663, 664</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>state of man, 514-533</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>essentials of, 514-522</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>results of, 523-525</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>concomitants of, 525-532</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Romish and Protestant views of, 521, 522</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Os sublime</foreign>, manifestation of internal endowments, 523</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pain, physical, existed before entrance of moral evil into world, 402</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this supralapsarian pain, how to be regarded, 402</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>due not to God, but to man, 402</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>verdicts declarative of the secondary place of, 402</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot explain its presence here by the good it may do, 403</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it is God's protest against sin, 403</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has its reason in the misconduct of man, 403</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supralapsarian pain an <q>anticipative consequence,</q>, 403</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's frown upon sin, and warning against it, 403</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestine, 174, 421</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pantheism, Idealistic, defined, 100</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the elements of truth in, 100</l>
<pb n='1100'/><anchor id='Pg1100'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its error, 100</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>denies real existence of the finite, 100</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deprives the infinite of self-consciousness and freedom, 100</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in it the worshiped is the worshiper, 100</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the later Brahmanism is, 100</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fruit of absence of will and longing for rest as end of existence, as among Hindus, 100</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Hegelianism, presents the alternative, no God or no man, 100</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Hegel and Spinoza, 100, 101</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Hegel, its different interpreters, 101</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Hegel, as modified by Schopenhauer, 101</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its idea of God self-contradictory, 101, 102</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its asserted unity of substance without proof, 102</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it assigns no sufficient cause for highest fact of universe, personal intelligence, 102</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it contradicts the affirmations of our moral and religious nature, 103</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>antagonizes our intuitive conviction of the absolute perfection of God, 104</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its objection that in eternity there was not not-self over against the Infinite to call forth self-consciousness, without foundation, 104</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>denies miracle, 122</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>denies inspiration, 204</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>anti-trinitarianism leads to, 347</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>involved in doctrine of emanation, 383</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assumes that law fully expresses God, 547</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>should worship Satan, 566</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at basis of Docetism, 676</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not involved in doctrine of Union with Christ, 800</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parables, 240, 784</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paradise, 403, 998, 999</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Paradoxon summum evangelicum</foreign>, 753</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pardon, limited by atonement, objections to, refuted, 766</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its conditions can of right be assigned by God, 767</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the act of God as judge in justification, 855</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and justification distinguished, 858, 859</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>through Christ, honors God's justice and mercy, 860</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parseeism, 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parsimony, law of, 74, 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passion, the, necessitated by Christ's incarnation, 760</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passover, 157, 723, 726, 960</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pastor, 908, 914, 915, 917</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Pastors and teachers,</q>, 915</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patripassians, 327</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul, 210, 235, 851, 999</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peace, 865</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Peccatum alienum</foreign>, 616</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelagianism, a development of rationalism, 89</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its theory of imputation, 597-601</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its principal author and present advocates, 597</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its exposition, 597</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its view of Romans 5:12, 597</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its seven points, 597</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its sinless men, 597</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non pleni nascimur</foreign>,</q>, 597</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its misinterpretation of the divine influence in man, 597</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is deism applied to man's nature, 598</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ignores his dignity and destiny, 598</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unformulated and sporadic, 598</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unscriptural, 598, 599</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a survival of paganism, 598</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its key doctrine: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Homo libero arbitrio emancipatus a Deo</foreign>, 598</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its unscriptural tenets specified, 598, 599</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regards sins as isolated volitions, 599</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its method contrasted with that of Augustinianism, 599</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents an Ebionitic view of Christ, 599</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its principles false in philosophy, 600</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ignores law by which acts produce states, 600</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penalty, what?, 294, 652, 653</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penalty, 652-660</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its idea, 652</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>more than natural consequences of transgression, 652</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not essentially reformatory, 653</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what essentially?, 653</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not essentially to secure social or governmental safety, 653, 655</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not essentially deterrent, 655</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sin, two-fold, 656</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sin, is physical death, 656-659</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sin, is spiritual death, 659, 660</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penitence, 766</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pentateuch (Hexateuch), its authorship, 170-172</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>literature upon, 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perfect, as applied to men, 574</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perfection, in God, 9, 260-275</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christian and church reached in world to come, 981</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perfectionism, its tenet, 877</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its teachers, 877</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its modifications, 877</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authorities upon, 877</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its fundamental false conceptions, 877, 878</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is contradicted by Scripture, 878-886</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disproved by Christian experience, 880</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how best met, 880, 881</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Permanent states of the faculties, 506, 550, 551</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perseverance, human side of sanctification, 868, 881</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>definition, 881</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its proof from Scripture, 882</l>
<pb n='1101'/><anchor id='Pg1101'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its proof from reason, 882, 883</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not inconsistent with human freedom, 883</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not tend to immorality, 883, 884</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not lead to indolence, 884</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Scriptural warnings against apostasy do not oppose it, 884, 885</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apparent instances of apostasy do not oppose it, 885, 886</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>list of authors on general subject of, 886</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Person</q> in doctrine of Trinity, only approximately accurate, 330</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Person, how communicated in different measures, 324</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Person and character of Christ, as proof of revelation, 186-190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Person of Christ, the doctrine of, 669-700</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>historical survey of views regarding, 669-673</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the two natures in their reality and integrity, 673-683</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the union of the two natures in one, 683-700</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Personal identity, 92, 417</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intelligences cannot be accounted for by pantheism, 102</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>influence, often distinct from word spoken, 820</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Personality, defined, 82, 252, 253, 330, 335, 515, 695</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of God, the conclusion of the anthropological argument, 84</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of God, denied by pantheism, 100</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the highest dependent on infiniteness, 104</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>self-conscious and self-determining, 253</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>triple, in Godhead, consistent with essential unity, 330</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in man, inalienable, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>involves boundless possibilities, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foundation of mutual love among men, 515</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constitutes a capacity for redemption, 515</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pessimism, 404, 405</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Peter'/>
<l>Peter, how he differed with Paul, 214</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Romish assumptions regarding, 909</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter, Second, 147, 149, 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pharaoh, the hardening of his heart, 434</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phenomena, 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philemon and Onesimus, moralized, 767</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophy, defined, 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Physico-theological argument, a term of Kant's, 75</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Physiology, comparative, favors unity of race, 480-483</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pictures of Christ, 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pie hoc potest dici, Deum esse Naturam</foreign>, 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plasticity of species, greater toward origin, 482</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plural quantitative, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pluralis majestaticus</foreign>, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poesy and poem, 852</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poetry, 526</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polytheism, 259, 347</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pools of modern Jerusalem, 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Positive Philosophy, 6, 9, 535, 545, 632</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Possession by demons, 456</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Præterist interpreters of Revelation, 1009</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer, relation of Providence to, 433</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its effect, not solely reflex influence, 433</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its answers not confined to spiritual means, 433</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not answered by suspension or breach of the order of nature, 434</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has no direct influence on nature, 434</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is answered by new combinations of natural forces, 434</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as an appeal to a personal and present God, it moves God, 435</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its answer, while an expression of God's will, may come through the use of appointed means, 435</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's immanency in nature helps to a solution of the problem, how prayer is answered, 436</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how the potency of prayer may be tested, 437, 438</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer-book, English, Arminian, 46</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on infant baptism, 957</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer-book of Edward VI, mode of baptism in, 957</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preaching of doctrinal sermons, 19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the decrees, 369</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the organic unity of the race in transgression, 634</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>larger part of, should consist in application of Divine law to personal acts, 648, 649</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>addressed to elect and non-elect, 789</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must press immediate submission to Christ, 830</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of everlasting punishment an auxiliary to the gospel appeal, 1053</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pre-Adamites, 476</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Precedent, N. T., the 'common-law' of the church, 970</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Preconformity to future events,</q>, 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Predestination, 355, 360, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Predicata</foreign>, not attributes, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prediction, only a part of prophecy, 134, 710</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Pre-established harmony,</q>, 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pre-existence of soul, 488-491</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preference, immanent, 514</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>elective,</q>, 557</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preparation, historical, for redemption, 665-668</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prerational instinct, 98</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prescience, Divine, 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Presentative intuition, 52, 53, 67</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preservation, 410-419</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>definition of, positive and negative, 410, 411</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proofs of, from Scripture and reason, 411-414</l>
<pb n='1102'/><anchor id='Pg1102'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deism, with its God withdrawn, denies, 414, 415</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>continuous creation, with momently new universe, inconsistent with, 415-418</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine concurrence in, considered, 418, 419</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pretermission of sin, 772</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preventive providence, 423</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pride, 569</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Priest</q> and <q>minister,</q>, 915, 967</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priestly office of Christ, 713-775</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Probability, 71</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Probation after death, 707, 1002, 1031-1044</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Adam, 629</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Procession of the Holy Spirit, its true formula, 323</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consistent with his equality in Trinity, 340, 341</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Progress of early Christianity, what principally conduced to?, 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prolegomena, 1-15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proof of Divine Revelation, principles of evidence applicable to, 41-44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophecy, as attesting a divine revelation, 134-141</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined in its narrow sense, 134, 135</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to miracles, 135</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>requirements in, 135</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>general features of Scriptural, 135, 136</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Messianic in general, 136</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as used by Christ, 136-138</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the double sense of, 138-140</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evidential force of, 140, 141</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alleged errors in, 235, 236</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christians have gifts of, 712</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>modern, as far as true, what?, 712</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophet, not always aware of meaning of his own prophecies, 139</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>later may elucidate earlier utterances, 235, 236</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his soul, is it rapt into God's timeless existence and vision?, 278</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>larger meaning of the word, 710</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Prophetæ priores</hi>, 710</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophetic office of Christ, 710-713</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-Christ'>Christ</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its nature, 710, 711</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fulfilled in three ways, 711</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its four stages, 711-713</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in his Logos-work, 711</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in his earthly ministry, 711, 712</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in his guidance and teaching of the church since his ascension, 712</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in his revelations of the Father to the saints in glory, 712, 713</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>will be eternal, 712</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Propitiation, 719, 720</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Proprietates</foreign>, distinguished from attributes, 246</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proselyte-baptism, 931, 932</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Protevangelium, Scripture germinally, 175</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Providence, doctrine of, 419-443</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 419</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explains evolution and progress of universe, 419, 420</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of, its proof from Scripture, 421-425</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a general providential control, 421, 422</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a control extending to free actions of men in general, 422, 423</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>four sorts, preventive, permissive, directive, determinative, 423-425</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rational proof of, 425-427</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>arguments <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign>, 425, 426</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>arguments <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign>, 426</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opposed by theory of fatalism, 427</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opposed by casualism, 427, 428</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opposed by theory of a merely general providence, 428-431</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to miracles and works of grace, 431-433</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to prayer, 433-439</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to Christian activity, 439-441</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to evil acts of free agents, 441-443</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>'Providential miracles,', 432</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Psychic phenomena, 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Punctiliousness, warning against, 428</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Punishment, implied in man's moral nature, 82</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not proceed from love, 272</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proceeds from justice, 293</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its idea, 652, 752</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what implied in its idea, 652-656</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has in it, beyond the natural consequences of transgression, a personal element, 652</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its object not the reformation of the sufferer, 653</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is the necessary reaction of divine holiness against sin, 653</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not essentially deterrent, 655</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sin is physical death, 656-659</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sin is spiritual death, 659, 660</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an ethical need of the divine nature, 751</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an ethical need in man's moral nature, 751</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of guilty, Christ's sufferings substituted for, 752</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is borne by the judge and punisher in the nature that has sinned, 752</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as presented in atonement, what it secures, 753</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>endured by Christ righteously, because of his relation to the sinning race, 754, 755</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>remitted in justification, 854</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>remitted on the ground of what Christ, to whom the sinner is united by faith, has done, 854, 858</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the final, of the wicked described in Scriptural figures, 1033, 1034</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the final, of the wicked, summed up, 1034</l>
<pb n='1103'/><anchor id='Pg1103'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>future, some concessions regarding, 1035</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of wicked, the future, not annihilation, 1035, 1036</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a weakening process ending in cessation of existence, 1036, 1037</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not an annihilating punishment after death, 1037</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>light from the evolutionary process thrown on, 1038</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excludes new probation and ultimate restoration of the wicked, 1039</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>declared in Scripture to be eternal, 1044</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a revelation of God's justice, 1046</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as the reaction of holiness against sin must continue while sin continues, 1046, 1047</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is endless since guilt is endless, 1048</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is eternal since sin is <q>eternal,</q>, 1048</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the facts of human life and tendencies of scientific thought point to the perpetuity of, 1049</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may have degrees yet be eternal, 1050</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may be eternal as the desert of sin of infinite enormity, 1050</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not inconsistent with God's benevolence, 1051-1054</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its proper preaching not a hindrance to success of the gospel, 1054</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if it is a fact, it ought to be preached, 1054</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to ignore it in pulpit teaching lowers the holiness of God, 1055</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fear of, not the highest but a proper motive to seek salvation, 1055</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in preaching it, the misery of the soul should have special emphasis, 1056</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purgatory, 659, 866, 1000-1002</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purification of Christ, the ritual, 761, 942, 943</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puritans, 546, 557</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purpose of God includes many decrees, 353</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in election, what?, 355</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in reprobation, what?, 355</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to save individuals, passages which prove, 780-783</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to do what he does, eternal, 783</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to save, not conditioned upon merit or faith, 784</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quasi carcere</foreign>, Christ not thus in Heaven, 709</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quia voluit</foreign> of Calvin, not final answer as to God's acts, 404</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quickening, Christ's, distinguished from his resurrection, 707</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quietism, 439, 440</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quo non ascendam?</foreign> not Christ's query, 764</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Race, Scripture teaches its descent from a single pair, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its descent from a single pair a foundation truth of Paul's, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its descent from a single pair the foundation of brotherhood, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its descent from a single pair corroborated by history, 477, 478</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its descent from a single pair corroborated by language, 478, 479</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its descent from a single pair corroborated by psychology, 479, 480</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its descent from a single pair corroborated by physiology, 480-483</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Race-responsibility, 594-597</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rational intuition, 52, 67</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rationalism and Scripture, 29, 30, 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Readings, various, 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Realism, in relation to God, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reason, definition of, 4, 29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its office, 29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>says <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scio</foreign>, not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>conscio</foreign>, 500</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>moral, depraved, 501</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reasoning, not reason, 29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a source of the idea of God, 65</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>errors of, in Bible, 232, 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Recognition, post-resurrectional, 1020, 1021</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Recollection of things not before seen, the seeming, explained, 488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>memory greater than, 705</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reconciliation, removal of God's wrath, 719</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of man to God, 777-886</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>objective, secured by Christ's union with race, 802</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subjective, secured by Christ's union with believers, 802</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Redemption and resurrection, what is secured by, 527</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wrought by Christ, 665-776</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its meaning, 707</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legal, of Christ, its import, 761</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its application, 777-886</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>application of, in its preparation, 777-793</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>application of, in its actual beginning, 793-868</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>application of, in its continuation, 868-886</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Redi's maxim, 389</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reformed theology, 44-46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Regenerate, some apparently such, will fall away, 884</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the truly, not always distinguishable in this life from the seemingly so, 884</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their fate if they should not persevere described, 885</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>these warnings secure their perseverance, 885</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Regeneration, illustrative of inspiration, 212</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ascribed to Holy Spirit, 316</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its nature, according to Romanists, 522</l>
<pb n='1104'/><anchor id='Pg1104'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the view that a child may be educated into, 606</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its place in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ordo salutis</foreign>, 793</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does a physical miracle attend?, 806</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 809</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its active and passive aspects, 809</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how represented in Scripture, 810-812</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>indispensable, 810</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a change in the inmost principle of life, 810</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a change in governing disposition, 810</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a change in moral relations, 810, 811</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wrought through use of truth, 811</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is instantaneous, 811</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wrought by God, 811</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>through union of soul with Christ, 811, 812</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its necessity, 812-814</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its efficient cause, 814-820</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the will not the efficient cause, 815-817</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is more than self-reformation, 815</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not co-operation with divine influence, which to the natural man is impossible, 816</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the truth is not the efficient cause, 817, 818</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Holy Spirit, the efficient cause of, 818-820</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Spirit in, operates not on the truth but on the soul, 819</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Spirit in, effects a change in the moral disposition, 820</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the instrumentality used in, 820-823</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>baptism a sign of, 821</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a spiritual change cannot be effected by physical means, 821</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is accomplished through the instrumentality of the truth, 822</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man not wholly passive at time of his, 822</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man's mind at time of, active in view of truth, 822</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nature of the change wrought in, 823-829</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a change by which governing disposition is made holy, 823-825</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not affect the quantity but the quality of the soul, 824</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>involves an enlightenment of the understanding and a rectification of the volitions, 825</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an origination of holy tendencies, 826</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an instantaneous change in soul, below consciousness and known only in results, 826-829</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is an instantaneous change, 826, 827</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>should not be confounded with preparatory stages, 827</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken place in region of the soul below consciousness, 828</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is recognized indirectly in its results, 828, 829</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the growth that follows, is sanctification, 829</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Regna, gloriæ, gratiæ</foreign> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>et naturæ</foreign>), 775</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reign of sin, what?, 553, 554</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religion and theology, how related, 19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>derivation of word, 19, 20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>false conceptions of it advocated by Hegel, Schleiermacher, and Kant, 20, 21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its essential idea, 21, 22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>there is but one, 22, 23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its content greater than that of theology, 23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from formal worship, 23, 24</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conspectus of the systems of, in world, 179-186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Remorse, perhaps an element in Christ's suffering, 769</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reparative goodness of God in nature, 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Repentance, more for sin than sins, 555</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the gift of God, 782</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>described, 832</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contains an intellectual element, 832</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contains an emotional element, 832, 833</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contains a voluntary element, 833, 834</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implies free-will, 834</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Romish view, 834</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wholly an inward act, 834</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manifested by fruits of repentance, 835</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a negative and not a positive means of salvation, 835</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if true, is in conjunction with faith, 836</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accompanies true faith, 836</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reprobation, 355</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rerum natura Dei voluntas est</foreign>, 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Respice</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>aspice</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>prospice</foreign> of Bernard applied to prophet's function, 710</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Responsibility for whatever springs from will, 509</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for inherited moral evil, its ground, 509</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is special help of Spirit essential to? 603, 604</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for a sinful nature which one did not personally originate, a fact, 629</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>none for immediate heredities, 630</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for belief, authors on, 841</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Restoration of all human beings, 1039-1044</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Resurrection'/>
<l>Resurrection, an event not within the realm of nature, 118</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ, the central and sufficient evidence of Christianity, 138</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ, dilemma for those who deny, 130</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ, Strauss fails to explain belief in, 157</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ, attested by epistles regarded as genuine by Baur, 160</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ, Renan's view of, 160, 161</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ's argument for, Matt. 22:32, 232, 996, 1018</l>
<pb n='1105'/><anchor id='Pg1105'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributed to Christ, 310</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributed to Holy Spirit, 316</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ, angel present at, 483</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ, gave proof that penalty of sin was exhausted, 657</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a stage in Christ's exaltation, 707</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proclaimed Christ as perfected and glorified man, 708</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ, the time of his justification, 762</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secured to believer by union with Christ, 805, 806, 867</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation to regeneration, 824</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sanctification completed at the, 874</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ and of the believer, Baptism a symbol of, 940-945</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implied in symbolism of Lord's Supper, 963, 964</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ's body, an object that may be worshiped, 968</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an event preparing for the kingdom of God, 981</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>allusions to, in O. T., 995</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Christ, the only certain proof of immortality, 997</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perfect joy or misery subsequent to, 1002</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scriptures describing a spiritual, 1015</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scriptures describing a physical, 1015</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>art and post-resurrection possibilities, 1016</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personality in, being indestructible, takes to itself a body, 1016</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ's body in, an open question, 1016</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an exegetical objection to, 1016</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>of the body,</q> the phrase not in N. T., 1016</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receive a <q>spiritual body</q> in, 1016, 1017</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the indwelling of the Holy Spirit secures preservation of body in, 1017</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the believer's, as literal and physical as Christ's, 1018</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>literal, to be suitable to events which accompany, 1018</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the physical connection between old and new body in, not unscientific, 1019</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the oneness of the body in, and our present body, rests on two things, 1020</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the body in, though not absolutely the same, will be identical with the present, 1020, 1021</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the spiritual body in, will complete rather than confine, the activities of spirit, 1021, 1022</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>four principles should influence our thinking about, 1022, 1023</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors on the subject in departments and entirety, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revelation, of such a nature as to make scientific theology possible, 11-15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revelation in nature requires supplementing, 26, 27</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God submits to limitations of,
which are largely those of theology, 34-36</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how regarded in <q>period of criticism and speculation,</q>, 46</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Scriptures a, from God, 111-242</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reasons for expecting from God a, 111-114</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>psychology shows that the intellectual and moral nature of man needs a, 111, 112</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>history shows that man needs a, 112</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what we know of God's nature leads to hope of a, 112, 113</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> reasons for expecting, 113, 114</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marks of the expected, 114-117</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its substance, 114</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its method, 114-116</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>will have due attestation, 116, 117</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attended by miracles, 117-134</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attested by prophecy, 134-141</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>principles of historical evidence entering into proof of, 141-144</l>
<l>Scripture, 175</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its connection with inspiration and illumination, 196, 197</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revenge, what?, 569</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Reversion to type</q> never occurs in man, 411</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rewards, earthly, appealed to in O. T., 230</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proceed from goodness of God, 290, 293</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not bestowed by justice or righteousness, 293</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goodness to creatures, righteousness to Christ, 293</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>are motives, not sanctions, 535</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Right, abstract, not ground of moral obligations, 299</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God is self-willing, 338</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>based on arbitrary will is not right, 338</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>based on passive nature, is not right, 338</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as being is Father, 338</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as willing is Son, 338</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Righteousness of God, what?, 290</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holiness in its mandatory aspect, 291</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its meaning in 2 Cor. 5:21, 760</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>demands punishment of sin, 764</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is justification and sanctification, 873</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romanism, and Scripture, 33, 34</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a mystical element in, 33</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it places church before the Bible, 33</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>would keep men in perpetual childhood, 33, 34</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabbath commemorates God's act of creation, 408</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made at creation applies to man always and everywhere, 408</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recognized in Assyria and Babylonia, as far back as Accadian times before Abraham, 408</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>was not abrogated by our Lord or his apostles, 409</l>
<pb n='1106'/><anchor id='Pg1106'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>upon, 409</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabbath, Christ's example and apostolic sanction have transferred it from seventh to first day of week,  409</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Justin Martyr on, 410</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors on, 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabellianism, 327, 328</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifice, 722-728</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what it is not, 722, 723</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its true import, 723, 724</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pagan and Semitic, its implications, 723, 724</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the legend of Æschylus, 723</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Passover, H. C. Trumbull's views of, 723</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its theocratical and spiritual offices, 724</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of O. T., when rightly offered, what implied in, 725, 726</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot present a formal divine institution, 726</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how Abel's differed from Cain's, 727</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the terminology of O. T. regarding, needful to correct interpretation of N. T. usage regarding atonement of Christ, 727</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>differing views as to significance of, 728</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifices, Jewish, a tentative scheme of, 725, 726</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saints, prayer to, 775</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how intercessors?, 775</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as applied to believers, 880</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctification, related to regeneration and justification, 862, 863</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>definition of, 869</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what implied in definition of, 869, 870</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explanations and Scripture proof of, 870-875</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a work of God, 870</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a continuous process, 871</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from regeneration, 871</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shown in intelligent and voluntary activity of believer, 871, 872</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the agency employed in, the indwelling Spirit of Christ, 872</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its mediate or instrumental cause is faith, 872</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the object of this instrumental faith is Christ himself, 873</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>measured by strength of faith, 873</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>influenced by lack of persistency in using means of growth, 874</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>completed in life to come, 874</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>erroneous views of, 875-881</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Antinomian view, 875-877</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Perfectionist view, 877-881</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctify, its twofold meaning, 880</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Satan, his personality, 447</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a collective term for all evil beings, 447</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>various literary conceptions of, 447</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meaning of term, 454</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opposed by Holy Spirit, 454</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his temptations, 455</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has access to human mind, 455</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may influence through physical organism, 455</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>delivering to,</q> 457</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>was specially active during earthly ministry of Christ, 458</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his power limited, 458</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the idea of his fall not self-contradictory, 460</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not irrational to suppose that by a single act he could change his nature, 460</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>present passion may lead a wise being to enter on a foolish course, 460</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>that God should create and uphold evil spirits no more inconsistent with benevolence than similar action towards evil men, 461</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a ganglionic centre of an evil system, 461</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the doctrine of, if given up, leads to laxity in administration of justice, 462</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as tool and slave of, humanity is indeed degraded, but was not always, nor needs to be, 462</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the fall of, uncaused from without, 585</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>like Adam, sins under the best circumstances, 588</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>permitted to divide the guilt with man that man might not despair, 588</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grows in cunning and daring, 1037</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Satisfaction to an immanent demand of divine holiness rendered by Christ's obedience and suffering, 713, 723</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by substitution founded on incorporation, 723</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and forgiveness not mutually exclusive because the judge makes satisfaction to his own violated holiness, 767</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penal and pecuniary, 767</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sinner's own act, according to Romish view, 834</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scholasticism and Scholastics, 44, 45, 265, 268, 443</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Science, defined, 2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its aim, 2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on what its possibility is grounded, 2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>requires a knowledge of more than phenomena, 6</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>existence of a personal God, its necessary datum, 60</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Scientia media, simplicis intelligentiæ, visionis</foreign>, 358</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scientific unity, desire for, its influence, 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Scio</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>conscio</foreign>, 500</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Scripture'/>
<l>Scripture and nature, 26</l>
<pb n='1107'/><anchor id='Pg1107'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and rationalism, 29-31</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contains nothing repugnant to a properly conditioned and enlightened reason, 29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and mysticism, 31, 32</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Romanism, 33, 34</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge of, incomplete, 35</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>topics on which silent, 72</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supernatural character of its teaching, 175</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its moral and religious ideas uncontradicted and unsuperseded, 175</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its supernaturally secured unity, 176</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ testifies to its supernatural character, 189</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>result of its propagation, 191</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how interpreted?, 217</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors differ, divine mind one, 217</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Christian rule of faith and practice, 218</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contains no scientific untruth, 224</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a code of practical action, but an enunciation of principles, 545</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scriptures, the, a revelation from God, 111-242</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>work of one God, and so organically articulated (Scripture), 217</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>why so many interpretations of?, 223, 224</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a rule in their interpretation, 1011</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Sealing,</q>, 831, 872</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seals, in Revelation, 1010</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selection, natural, without teleological factors, its inadequacy, 391</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is it in any sense the <emph>cause</emph> of the origin of species?, 391</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it has probably increased the rapidity of development, 391, 392</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>or <q>survival of the fittest,</q> how suggested?, 403</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is partially true, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it gives no account of the origin of substance or variations, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not the savior of the fittest, but the destroyer of the failures, 470</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>facts that it cannot explain, 470, 471</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nor artificial has produced a new species, 471</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Self-limitation, divine, 9, 126, 255</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selfishness, the essence of sin, 567</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot be resolved into simpler elements, 568</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forms in which it manifests itself, 568, 569</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of unregenerate, the substitution of a lower for a higher end, 570</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sentimentality, 979</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Signality,</q> in miracle, 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sin'/>
<l>Sin, God the author of free beings who are the authors of, 365</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the decree to permit not efficient, 365</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its permission a difficulty of all theistic systems, 366</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its permission, how not to be explained, 366</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its permission, how it may be partially explained, 366</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the problem of, one of four at present not to be completely solved, 366, 367</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>observations from many sources aiming to throw light on the existence of moral evil, 367, 368</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man's, as suggested from without, perhaps the mitigating circumstance that allows of his redemption, 462</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in what sense a nature?, 518</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effect of first, not a weakening but a perversion of human nature, 521</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the first did more than despoil man of a special gift of grace, 521</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>or man's state of apostasy, 533-664</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its nature, 549-573</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 549</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Old and New School views regarding, their difference and approximation, 549, 550</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a state, some psychological notes explanatory of, 550, 551</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a state is counteracted by an immanent divine power which leads towards salvation, 551</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>total depravity</q> as descriptive of, an out-grown phrase, 552</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as act of transgression and disposition or state, proved from Scripture, 552-554</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the words which describe, applicable to dispositions and states, 552</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>N. T. descriptions of, give prominence to states and dispositions, 552, 553</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and moral evil in the thoughts, affections, and heart, 553</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is name given to a state which originated wrong desires, 553</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is represented as existing in soul prior to consciousness of it, 553</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a permanent power or reigning principle, 553</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mosaic sacrifices for sins other than mere act, 554</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>universally attributed to disposition or state, 554</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributed to outward act only when such act is symptomatic of inward state, 554</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if it tend from act to a state, regarded as correspondingly blameworthy, 554</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in an individual condemned though it cannot be traced back to a conscious originating act, 554, 555</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when it becomes fixed and dominant moral corruption, meets special disapprobation, 555</l>
<pb n='1108'/><anchor id='Pg1108'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded by the Christian as a manifestation of subconscious depravity of nature, 555</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>repented of, principally as depravity of nature, 555</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rather than <q>sins</q> repented of by Christians advanced in spiritual culture; a conspectus of quotations to prove this, 555-557</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its definition as 'the voluntary transgression of known law' discussed, 557-559</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not always a distinct and conscious volition, 557</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intention aggravates, but is not essential to, 558</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge aggravates, but is not essential to, 558</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ability to fulfil the law, not essential to, 558</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>definition of, 558, 559</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its essential principle, 559-573</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not sensuousness, 559-563</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is not finiteness, 563-566</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is selfishness, 567-573</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is universal, 573-582</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>committed by every human being, arrived at maturity, 573</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its universality set forth in Scripture, 573, 574</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its universality proved from history, 574</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its universality proved from Christian experience, 576</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the outcome of a corrupt nature possessed by every human being, 577</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is act or disposition referred to a corrupt nature, 577</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rests on men who are called in Scripture 'children of wrath,', 578</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its penalty, death, visits those who have never exercised personal or conscious choice, 579</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its universality proved from reason, 579, 580</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>testimony of great thinkers regarding, 580-582</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its origin in the personal act of Adam, 582-593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the origin of the sinful nature whence it comes is beyond the investigations of reason, 582</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scriptural account of its origin, 582-585</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Adam's, its essential nature, 587</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Adam in resisting inworking God, 587</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an immanent preference of the world, 587</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be accounted for psychologically, 587</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external temptation to first sin a benevolent permission, 588</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>self-originated, Satanic, 588</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the first temptation to, had no tendency to lead astray, 588</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the first, though in itself small, a revelation of will thoroughly alienated from God, 590</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consequences of original, as respects Adam, 590-593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>physical death, a consequence of his first, 590, 591</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spiritual death, a consequence of his first, 591, 592</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exclusion from God's presence, a consequence of his first, 592</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>banishment from the Garden, a consequence of man's first, 593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the, of our first parents constituted their posterity sinners, 593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two insistent questions regarding the first, and the Scriptural answer, 593</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imputation of, its true meaning, 594</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>original, its meaning, 594</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man's relations to moral law extend beyond conscious and actual, 595</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's moral government recognizes race-sin, 595</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>actual, more guilty than original, 596</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no man condemned for original, alone, 596, 664</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the only ground of responsibility for race-sin, 596</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>original, its correlate, 596</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imputation of Adam's, 597-637</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-Imputation'>Imputation</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pelagian theory of the imputation of, 597-601</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Arminian theory of the imputation of, 601-606</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>New School theory of the imputation of, 606-612</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Federal theory of the imputation of, 612-616</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mediate theory of the imputation of, 616-619</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Augustinian theory of the imputation of, 619-637</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>table of theories of imputation of, 628</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apart from, and prior to, consciousness, 629</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conscience and Scripture attest that we are responsible for our unborn tendency to, 629</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as our nature, rightly punishable with resulting sin, 632</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reproductive, each reproduction increasing guilt and punishment, 633</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>each man guilty of personal, which expresses more than original depravity of nature, 633</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is self-perpetuating, 633</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is self-isolating, 634</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the nature, and sins its expression, 635</l>
<pb n='1109'/><anchor id='Pg1109'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as Adam's, ruins, so Christ's obedience saves, 635</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consequences of, to Adam's posterity, 637-664</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>depravity a consequence of Adam's, 637-640</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in nature, as <q>total depravity,</q> considered, 637-640</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>total inability a consequence of Adam's, 640-644</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guilt a consequence of Adam's, 644-652</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty, a consequence of Adam's, 652-660</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>infants in a state of, 661</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>venial and mortal, 648</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of nature and personal transgression, 648, 649</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of ignorance and of knowledge, 649</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of infirmity and of presumption, 649, 650</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of incomplete and final obduracy, 650-652</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unto death, considered, 650-652</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>against Holy Spirit, why unpardonable, 651, 652</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty of, considered, 652-660</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>infants in a state of, 661</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ free from hereditary and actual, 676-678</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ responsible for human, 759</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ responsible for Adam's, 759</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ as great Penitent confesses race-sin, 760</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ, how made to be, 760-763</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a pretermission of, justified in cross, 772</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not condemn, but the failure to ask pardon for it, 856</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>judged and condemned on Calvary, 860</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>future, the virtual pardon of, 867</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>dwelling,</q> and <q>reigning,</q>, 869, 870</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled by bringing in Christ, 873</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not most sympathize with sin, 1028</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hinders intercourse with other worlds, 1033</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>eternal,</q>, 1033</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made the means of displaying God's glory, 1038</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>chosen in spite of infinite motives to the contrary, 1040</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinner, the incorrigible, glorifies God in his destruction, 442</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>negatively described, 637, 638</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>positively described, 639</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what he can do, 640</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what he cannot do, 640</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under conviction, more of a sinner than before, 827</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has no right to do anything before accepting Christ, 868</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Six hundred sixty-six,</q>, 570</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Slope, the,</q>, 580</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Society, atomistic theory of, 623</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Society, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>bellum omnium contra omnes</foreign> (Hobbes), 461</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socinianism, 47, 328, 329, 524, 558, 597, 728-733</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solidarity, 624</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sola fides justificat, sed fides non est sola</foreign>, 758</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Son,</q> its import in Trinity, 334</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Son, the, a perfect object of will, knowledge and love to God, 275, 388</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his eternal generation, 341</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>uncreate, 341</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his essence not derived from essence of the Father, 341</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his existence eternal, 341</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exists by internal necessity of Divine nature, 342</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eternal generation of, a life movement of the Divine nature, 342</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in person subordinate to person of Father, 342</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in essence equal with Father, 342</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Son of man, cannotes, among other things, a veritable humanity, 673</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Song of Solomon, 233, 238</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sonship of Christ, eternal, 340</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>metaphysical, 340</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors on, 343</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sorrow for sin, 832, 833</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soteriology, 665-894</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soul, what?, 92</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dichotomous view of, 483</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>trichotomous view of, 484</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from spirit, 484</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its origin, 488</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its pre-existence, according to poets, 489</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creatian theory of, 491</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not something added from without, 492</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>introduced into body, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sicut vinum in vase acetoso</foreign>, 493</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>metaphysical generation of, 493</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traducian theory of, 494-497</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>history of theory, 493, 494</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>observations favorable to, 494-497</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>image of God, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>proprie</foreign>, 528</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>always active, though not always conscious, 550</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may influence another soul apart from physical intermediaries, 820</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not inaccessible to God's direct operation, 820</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as uncompounded cannot die, 984</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-Immortality'>Immortality</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Sovereign, the,</q> a title of Messiah, 321</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Space, 278, 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Space and time, 85, 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Space <q>in God,</q>, 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Species, 392, 480-482, 494</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirit, the Holy, his teaching, a necessity, 27</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hides himself, 213</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recognized as God, 315</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine characteristics and prerogatives ascribed to, 316</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>associated with God, 316</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his deity supported by Christian experience, 316</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his deity, a doctrine of the church, 316</l>
<pb n='1110'/><anchor id='Pg1110'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Holy, his deity not disproved by O. T. limitations, 317</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his deity, authors on, 317</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is a person, 323</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>designations of personality given to him, 323</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>the mother-principle</q> in the Godhead, 323</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>so mentioned with other persons as to imply personality, 323, 324</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>performs acts of personality, 324</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>affected by acts of others, 324</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possesses an emotional nature, 325</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visibly appears as distinct from, yet connected with Father and Son, 325</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ascription to him, of personal subsistence, 325</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>import of his presence in Trinity, 334</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the centripetal movement of Deity, 336</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Christ, differences in their work, 338-340</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his nature and work, authors on, 340</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his eternal procession, 340-343</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if not God, God could not be appropriated, 349</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a work of completing belongs to, 313</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>applies Scriptural truth to present circumstances, 440</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>directs the God-man in his humiliation, 696</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his intercession, 774, 775</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his intermediacy, 793</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witness of, what?, 844, 845</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of <q>sealing</q> distinguished from mysticism, 845</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in believer, substitutes old excitements, 872</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Spirit</q> and <q>soul,</q>, 843</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirit, how applied to Christ, 333</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirits, evil, tempt, 455</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>control natural phenomena, 455</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>execute God's plans, 457</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not independent of human will, 457, 458</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restrained by permissive will of God, 458</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exist and act on sufferance, 459</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their existence not inconsistent with benevolence of God, 461</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>are organized, 461</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the doctrine of, not immoral, 461, 462</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of, not degrading, 462</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their nature and actions illustrate the evil of sin, 463</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge of their existence inspires a salutary fear, 463</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sense of their power drives to Christ, 463</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contrasting their unsaved state with our spiritual advantages causes us to magnify grace of God, 463</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Spirits in prison,</q>, 707, 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spiritual body, 1016, 1017</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spiritualism, 32, 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spontaneous generation, 389</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stoicism, 184</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Style, 223</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sublapsarianism, 777</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Subordinationism, 342</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Substance, known, 5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its characteristics, 6</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a direct knowledge of it as underlying phenomena, 97</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Substances, the theory of two eternal, 378-383</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>See <ref target='Index-Dualism'>Dualism</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Substantia una et unica</foreign>, 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffering, in itself not reformatory, 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suggestion, 453, 454</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Sunday,</q> used by Justin Martyr, 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supererogation, works of, 522</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supper, the Lord's, a historical monument, 157</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its ritual and import, 959</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instituted by Christ, 959, 960</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its mode of administration, 960-962</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its elements, 960</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its communion of both kinds, 960</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is of a festal nature, 960, 961</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>commemorative, 961</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>celebrated by assembled church, 961</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>responsibility of its proper observance rests with pastor as representative of church, 962</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its frequency discretional, 962</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes personal appropriation of the benefits of Christ's death, 963</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes union with Christ, 963</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes dependence on Christ, 963</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes a reproduction of death and resurrection in believer, 963</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes union in Christ, 963</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it symbolizes the coming joy and perfection of the kingdom of God, 963</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its connection with baptism, 964</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is to be often repeated, 964</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implies a previous state of grace, 964</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the blessing conveyed in communion depends on communicant, 964</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expresses fellowship of believer, 964</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Romanist view of, 965-968</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Lutheran and High Church view of, 968, 969</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>there are prerequisites, 969, 970</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prerequisites laid down by Christ, 970</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regeneration, a prerequisite to, 971</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>baptism, a prerequisite to, 971-973</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>church membership, a prerequisite to, 973</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an orderly walk, a prerequisite to, 973-975</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the local church the judge as to the fulfilment of these prerequisites, 975-977</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>special objections to open communion presented, 977-980</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supralapsarianism, 777</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Symbol, derivation and meaning, 42</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>less than thing symbolized, 1035</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Symbolism, period of, 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Symbolum Quicumque</hi>, 329</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1111'/><anchor id='Pg1111'/>

<lg>
<l>Synagogue, 902</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synergism, 816</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synoptic gospels, date, 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Synthetic idealization of our existence,</q>, 568</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synthetic method in theology, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>System of theology, a dissected map, some parts of which already put together, 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Systematic theologian, the first, 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Systematic truth influences character, 16</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tabula rasa</foreign> theory, of Locke, 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talmud shows what the unaided genius for religion could produce, 115</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tapeinoticon genus</foreign>, 686</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Teaching, the, of the Twelve Apostles,</q>, 159, 937, 953</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teleological argument for the existence of God, 75-80</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>statement of argument, 75</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called also <q>physico-theological,</q>, 75</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divided by some into eutaxiology and teleology proper, 75</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the major premise is a primitive and immovable conviction, 75</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the minor premise, a working principle of science, 77</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it does not prove a personal God, 78, 79</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it does not prove unity, eternity, or infinity of God, 79, 80</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>adds intelligence and volition to the causative power already proved to exist, 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Telepathy, 1021</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temptation, prevented by God's providence, 423</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not pervert, but confirms, the holy soul, 588, 589</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Adam's, Scriptural account of, 582, 583</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Adam's, its course and result, 584, 585</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Adam's, contrasted with Christ's, 677, 678</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ's, as possible as that of Adam, 677</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>aided by limitations of his human intelligence, 677</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>aided by his susceptibility to all forms of innocent gratification, 677</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in wilderness, addressed to desire, 677</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Gethsemane, to fear, 677</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Ueberglaube</foreign>, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Aberglaube</foreign>, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Unglaube</foreign>, appealed to, 677</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is always <q>without sin,</q>, 677</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors upon, 678</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Satan, negative and positive, 455</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tempter's promise, the, 572</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tendency-theory of Baur, 157-160</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tendency, undeveloped, 847</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Terminology, a, needed in progress of a science, 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Testament New, genuineness of, 146-165</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rationalistic theories to explain origin of its gospels, 155-165</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its moral system, 177-186</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its morality contrasted with that of heathenism, 179-186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Testament, Old, in what sense its works are genuine, 162</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how proved, 165-175</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alleged errors in quoting or interpreting, 234, 235</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Testimony, science assumes faith in, 3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>amount of, necessary to prove miracle, 127, 128</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in general, 142-144</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>statements in, may conflict without being false, 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tests, does God submit to?, 437</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Theologian'/>
<l>Theologian, characteristics of, 38-41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theological Encyclopædia, 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theology, its definition, 1, 2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its aim, 2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its possibility, 2-15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its necessity, 15-19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to religion, 19-24</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rests on God's self-revelation, 25</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rests on his revelation in nature, 26</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>natural and Scriptural, how related, 26-29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rests on Scripture and reason, 29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rationalism hurtful to, 30-31</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rests on Scripture and a true mysticism, 31</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>avoids a false mysticism, 32</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accepts history of doctrine as ancillary, 33</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>declines the combination, Scripture and Romanism, 33, 34</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its limitations, 34-36</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a perfect system of, impossible, 36, 37</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is progressive, 37</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its method, 38-51</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>requisites to its study, 38-41</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-Theologian'>Theologian</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divisions of, 41-44</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Biblical, 41</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>historical, 41</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>systematic, 41, 42</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>practical, 42-44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theology, Systematic, its history, 44</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Eastern church, 44</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Western Church, 44-46</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its period of scholasticism, 44, 45</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its period of symbolism, 45, 46</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its period of criticism and speculation, 46</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a list of authorities in, differing from Protestantism, 47</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>British theology, 47, 48</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Baptist theologians, 47</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Puritan theologians, 47, 48</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scotch Presbyterian theologians, 48</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Methodist theologians, 48</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Quaker theologians, 48</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>English Church theologians, 48</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>American theology, 48, 49</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Reformed system, 48, 49</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the older Calvinism, 49</l>
<pb n='1112'/><anchor id='Pg1112'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>order in which its subjects may be treated, 49, 50</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>analytic method in, 49, 50</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>synthetic method in, 50</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>text-books in, 50, 51</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theonomy, 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophany, Christ not a mere, 686</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Things,</q>, 95, 96, 254</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thought, does not go on in the brain, 93</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possible without language, 216</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intermittent or continuous?, 1002</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Three thousand baptized in one day in time of Chrysostom, 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thucydides never mentions Socrates, 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Time, its definition, 276</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God not under law of, 276</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has objective reality to God, 276</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>one eternal now,</q> how to be understood, 277</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>can the human spirit escape the conditions of, 278</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors on <q>time</q> and <q>eternity,</q>, 278</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torments of wicked, outward, subordinate results and accompaniments of state of soul, 1034</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tradition, and idea of God, 63</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot long be trusted to give correct evidence, 142</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of a <q>golden age</q> and matters cognate, 480, 526</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Traducianism, its advocates and teaching, 493, 494</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>best accords with Scripture, 494, 495</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>favored by analogy of vegetable and animal life, 496</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>heredities, mental, spiritual, and moral, prove men's souls of human ancestry, 496</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not exclude divine concurrence in the development of the human species, 496</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fathers, who held, 620</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trafalgar, omitted in Napoleon's dispatches, 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transcendence, divine, denied by pantheism, 100</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taught in Scripture, 102</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deism, an exaggeration of, 414</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transgression, a stab at heart of God, 541</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not proper translation of 1 John 3:4, 452</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its universality directly taught in Scripture, 573</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its universality proved in universal need of atonement, regeneration, and repentance, 573</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its universality shown in condemnation that rests on all who do not accept Christ, 574</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its universality, consistent with passages which ascribe a sort of goodness to some men, 574</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its universality proved by history, and individual experience and observation, 574, 575</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proved from Christian experience, 576</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>uniformity of actual transgression, a proof that will is impotent, 611</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all moral consequences flowing from, are sanctions of law, 637</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transubstantiation, what?, 965</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rests on a false interpretation of Scripture, 965</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contradicts the senses, 966</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>denies completeness of sacrifice of Calvary, 967</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>externalizes and destroys Christianity, 967, 968</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trees of <q>life</q> and <q>knowledge,</q>, 526, 527, 583</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trichotomous theory of man's nature, 484-487</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Trimurti</foreign>, Brahman Trinity, 351</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Trinitas dualitatem ad unitatem reducit</foreign>, 338</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Trinitatem, I ad Jordanem et videbis</hi>, 325</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trinities, heathen, 351</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Trinity'/>
<l>Trinity, renders possible an eternal divine self-contemplation, 262</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the immanent love of God understood only in light of, 265</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the immanent holiness of God rendered intelligible by doctrine of, 274</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has close relations to doctrine of immanent attributes, 275, 336</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of the, 304-352</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a truth of revelation only, 304</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intimated in O. T., made known in N. T., 304</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>six main statements concerning, 304</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the term ascribed to Tertullian, 304</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a designation of four facts, 304</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>held implicitly, or in solution, by the apostles, 304</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>took shape in the Athanasian Creed (8th or 9th century), 305</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>usually connected with <q>semi-trinitarian</q> Nicene Creed (325 A. D.), 305</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>references on doctrine of, 305</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implies the recognition in Scripture of three as God, 305-322</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents proofs from N. T., 305-317</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents Father as recognized as God, 305</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents Jesus Christ as recognized as God, 305-315</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appeals to Christian experience as confirming the deity of Christ, 313, 314</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>explains certain passages apparently inconsistent with Christ's deity, 314, 315</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>allows an order of office and operation consistent with essential oneness and equality, 314, 342</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of, how its construction started, 314</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents the Holy Spirit recognized as God, 315-317</l>
<pb n='1113'/><anchor id='Pg1113'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intimations of, in the O. T., 317-322</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seemingly alluded to in passages which teach a plurality of some sort in the Godhead, 317-319</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seemingly alluded to in passages relating to the Angel of Jehovah, 319</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seemingly alluded to in descriptions of Divine Wisdom and Word, 320, 321</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>owes nothing to foreign sources, 320</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seemingly alluded to in descriptions of the Messiah, 321-322</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>O. T. contains germ of doctrine of, 322</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its clear revelation, why delayed?, 322</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>insists that the three recognized as God are presented in Scripture as distinct persons, 322-326</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>asserts that this tripersonality of the divine nature is immanent and eternal, 326</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>it alleges Scriptural proof that the distinctions of personality are eternal, 326</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Sabellian heresy regarding, 327-328</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Arian heresy regarding, 328-330</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches a tripersonality which is not tritheism, for while the persons are three, the essence is one, 330</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how the term <q>person</q> is used in, 330, 331</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the oneness of essence explained, 331-334</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches an association which is more than partnership, 331</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents itself as the organism of the deity, 331</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>permits intercommunion and mutual immanency of persons, 332, 333</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches equality of the three persons, 334-343</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches that the titles belong to the persons, 334, 335</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employs the personal titles in a qualified sense, 335-340</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents to us life-movement in the Godhead, 336-338</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches a <q>generation</q> that is consistent with equality, 340</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches a <q>procession</q> that is consistent with equality, 340</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is inscrutable, 344</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all analogies inadequate to represent it, 344</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>illustrations of, their only use, 345</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not self-contradictory, 345</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents faculty and function at highest differentiation, 346</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relations to other doctrines, 347</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its acceptance essential to any proper theism, 347</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its denial leads to pantheism, 347</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>essential to any proper revelation, 349</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evidence of, in prayer, 349</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>essential to any proper redemption, 350</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effects of its denial on religious life, 350, 351</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>essential to any proper model for human life, 351</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sets law of love before us as eternal, 351</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shows divine pattern of receptive life, 351</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors on the doctrine, 351</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trisagion, the, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tritheism, inconsistent with idea of God, 330</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trivialities in Scripture, their use, 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Truth, God's, what?, 260</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>immanent, 260</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a matter of being, 261</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foundation of truth among men, 261</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the principle and guarantee of all revelation, 262</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not of God's will, but of his being, 262</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's transitive, 288-290</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-Veracity-Faithfulness'>Veracity and Faithfulness</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributed to Christ, 309</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attributed to the Holy Spirit, 316</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as the efficient cause of regeneration, 817-820</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hated by sinner, 817</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>neither known nor obeyed without a change of the affections, 818</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>even God cannot make it more true, 819</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>without God, an abstraction, not a power, 819</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ubi caritas</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ibi claritas</foreign>, 520</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ubi Spiritus, ibi Christus</foreign>, 333</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ubi tres medici, ibi duo athei</foreign>, 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ubiquity of Christ's human body, 709</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation to Lord's Supper, 968</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation to views of heaven, 1032</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Ueberglaube</foreign>, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Aberglaube</foreign>, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Unglaube</foreign>, the chief avenues of temptation, 677</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uhlhorn, on the <q>if's</q> of Tacitus, 989</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ullmann, on the derivation of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sapientia</foreign>, 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Una navis est jam bonorum omnium</foreign>, 881</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uncaused cause, the idea of, not from logical inference, but intuitive belief, 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unconditioned being, the presupposition of our knowing, 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unconscious mental action, 551, 555</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unconscious substance cannot produce self-conscious and free beings, 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Understanding, the servant of the will, 460</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unicus</foreign>, as applied to the divine nature, 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uniformity of nature, a presumption against miracles, 124</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not absolute and universal, 124</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>could only be asserted on the ground of absolute and universal knowledge, 124</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disproved by geology, 124</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>breaks in, illustrated, 125</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>final cause is beneath, 125</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of volitional action rests on character, 509</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of evil choice, implies tendency or determination, 611</l>
<pb n='1114'/><anchor id='Pg1114'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of transgression, a demonstration of impotence of will, 611</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unio personalis</foreign>, 689, 690</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Union'/>
<l>Union of the two natures in the one person of Christ, 683-700</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>moral, between different souls, 799</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with Christ, believer's, and man's with Adam, compared, 627</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with Christ, believer's, wholly due to God, 781</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to regeneration and conversion, 793</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of, 795-808</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reasons for its neglect, 795</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scripture representations of, 795-798</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by building and foundation, 795</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by marriage union, 795, 796</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by vine and branch, 796</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consistent with individuality, 796</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by head and members, 796</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by union of race with Adam, 797</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>believer is in Christ, 797</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ is in believer, 797</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Father and Son dwell in believer, 797</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>believer has life by Christ as Christ has life by union with the Father, 797</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>believers are one through, 797</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>believers made partakers of divine nature through, 798</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by it believer made one spirit with the Lord, 798</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nature of, 798-802</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a merely natural union, 799</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a merely moral union, 799</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a union of essence, 799, 800</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in it believer most conscious of his personality and power, 800</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not mediated by sacraments, 800</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an organic union, 800</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a vital union, 801</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a spiritual union, 801</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>originated and sustained by Holy Spirit, 801</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by virtue of omnipresence the whole Christ with each believer, 281, 704, 801</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inscrutable, 801</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in what sense mystical, 801</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authors on, 802</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consequences of, to believer, 802-809</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>removes the internal obstacle to man's return to God, in the case of his people, 802</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>involves change in the dominant affection of the soul (Regeneration), 804</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is the true <q>transfusion of blood,</q>, 804</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>involves a new exercise of soul's powers in Repentance and Faith (Conversion), 804</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>this phase of, illustrated by the depuration of Chicago River, 804, 805</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with Christ gives to believer legal standing and rights of Christ (Justification), 805</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secures to the believer the transforming, assimilating power of Christ's life, for soul and body (Sanctification and Perseverance), 805</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does it secure physical miracles in deliverance from fleshly besetments of those who experience it?, 806</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brings about a fellowship with Christ, and thus a fellowship of believers with one another here and hereafter (Ecclesiology and Eschatology), 806</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>secures among Christians the unity not of external organization, but of a common life, 807</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives assurance of salvation, 808</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excerpts upon, from noted names in theology, 808</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>references upon, 808, 809</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unique, the, 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unitarianism, derivation of term, 330</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its founders, 47</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their relation to Arianism, 329</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tends to pantheism, 347</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fosters lax views of sin, 350</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holds to Pelagian views of sin, 597</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holds to Socinian views of atonement, 728, 729</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unity of Scripture, 175</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unity of God, 259, 304</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consistent with a trinity, 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unity of human race, taught in Scripture, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lies at foundation of Pauline doctrine of sin and salvation, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ground of obligation of brotherhood among men, 476</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>various arguments for, 477-483</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opposed by theorists who propound different centres of creation, 481</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opposed on the ground that the physical diversities in the race are inconsistent with a common origin, 481, 482</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Universalia, ante</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>post rem</foreign>, and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in re</foreign>, 621</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Universalism, its error, 1047</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Universality of transgression, 573-577</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Universals, 621</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Universe, regarded as thought, must have had an absolute thinker, 60</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its substance cannot be shown to have had a beginning, 73</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has its phenomena had a cause within itself (pantheism)?, 73</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mind in it, leads us to infer mind in maker, 73</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if eternal, yet, as contingent and relative, it only requires an eternal creator, 74</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>since its infinity cannot be proved, why infer from its perhaps limited existence an infinite creator?, 74</l>
<pb n='1115'/><anchor id='Pg1115'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its order and useful collocation may be due to an impersonal intelligence (pantheism), 77</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its present harmony proves a will and intelligence equal to its contrivance, 80</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>facts of, erroneous explanations of, 90-105</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not necessary to divine blessedness, 265</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>God's ceaseless conversation with his creatures,</q>, 436</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exists for moral and spiritual ends, 436</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a harp in which one string, our world, is out of tune, 451, 1033</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unus</foreign>, as applied to divine nature, 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Utopia, More's, an adumbration of St. John's City of God, 1031</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vacuum, 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vanity, what?, 569</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Variation, law of, 470, 491, 492</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Variations, are in the divine operation, not in the divine plan, 258</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vedas, 56, 203, 222, 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Veracity-Faithfulness'/>
<l>Veracity and faithfulness of God, the, his transitive truth, 288, 289</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by virtue of, his revelations consist with his being and with each other, 288</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by virtue of, he fulfils all his promises expressed or implied, 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viæ</foreign>, employed in determining the divine attributes, 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vice, can it be created?, 520</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgin-birth of Christ, 675-678</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgin, the Immaculate Conception of, its absurdity, 677</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virtue, 298-303</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see <ref target='Index-Moral-Obligation'>Moral obligation</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vishnu, incarnations of, 351</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Volition, the shadow of the affections, 815</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>executive, 504</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a subordinate, not always determined by fundamental choice, 510, 870</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Voluntary</q> and <q>volitional</q> contrasted, 557</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Voluntas</foreign></q> and <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>arbitrium</foreign></q> distinguished, 557</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Vorsehung</foreign>, an aspect of providence, 419</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vulgate, 226, 799</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Waters,</q> the best term in Hebrew to express <q>fluid mass,</q>, 395</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Weltgeschichte, die, ist das Weltgericht</hi>, 1024</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wicked, in the intermediate state, 999, 1000</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in intermediate state, under constraint and guard, 999</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in intermediate state, in conscious suffering, 999</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in intermediate state, under punishment, 1000</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in intermediate state, their souls do not sleep, 1000</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the final state, 1033-1056</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their final state, in Scriptural figures, 1033</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their final state, a summing up statement, 1034</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their final state is not annihilation, 1035, 1036</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their final state has in it no element of new probation or final restoration, 1039-1043</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their final state, one of everlasting punishment, 1044-1046</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their final state, a revelation of God's justice, 1046-1051</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their final state, a revelation of a benevolence which permits the self-chosen ruin of a few to work for the salvation of the many, 1051-1054</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their final state, should be preached with sympathy and solemnity, 1054-1056</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Will, free, not under law of physical causation, 26</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, acts on nature without suspending its laws, 121</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, acts initially without means, 122</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its power over body, 122</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has not the freedom of indifference, 363</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an act of pure, unknown to human consciousness, 363, 507</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and sensibility, two distinct powers, 363</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christianity gives us more, 440</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy Spirit emancipates the, 440</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defined, 504</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>determinism of, rejected, 504</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and other faculties, 505</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>element in every act of soul, 505</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man is chiefly, 504</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the verb has no imperative, 505</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and permanent state, 505, 506</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slight decisions of, lead to fixation of character, 506</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and motives, 506, 507</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>permanent states influence, 506</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not compelled, but persuaded by motive, 506</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in choosing between motives, chooses with a motive, namely the motive chosen, 507</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and contrary choice, 507, 508</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>we know causality only as we know, 508</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a power of originating action, limited by subjective and social conditions, 508</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>will, free, chooses between impulses, 508</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and responsibility, 509, 510</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>naturally exercised with a bias, 509</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>free, gives existence to duty and morality, 510</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is defeated in immorality, 511</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deterministic theory of, objections to, 511</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>will does not create force, but directs it, 512</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>will as great a mystery as the Trinity, 512</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>references on, 513</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evil, the man himself, 555</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>more than faculty of volitions, 600</l>
<pb n='1116'/><anchor id='Pg1116'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its impotence proved by uniformity of transgression, 611</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>such a decision of, as will justify God in condemning men, when found, 612</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a determination of the, prior to individual consciousness&mdash;a difficult but fruitful hypothesis, 624</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the cause of sin in holy beings, 629</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not absolutely as a man's character, 633</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>character its surest but not its infallible index, 633</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man's, does more than express, it may curb, his nature, 633</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has permanent states, as well as transient acts, 764</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's action, in conversion, 792, 793</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the depraved, has inconceivable power to resist God, 1048</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's, not sole force in universe, 411</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God's <q>revealed</q> and <q>secret,</q> 791</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Will,</q> and <q>shall,</q> as to man's actions, distinguished, 354</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Wille</foreign> and <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Wilkür</foreign>, 557</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wisdom, divine, its nature, 286</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in O. T., 320</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Apocrypha, 320</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witness of Spirit, 844, 845</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Word, divine, the medium and test of spiritual communications, 32</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine, in O. T., 320</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christ, the, 335</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Works of God, 371-464</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>World, final conflagration and rehabilitation, 1015</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may be part of the heaven of the saints, 1032, 1033</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worship, defined, 23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to religion, 23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>depends on God's glory, 255</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>final state of righteous one of, 1029, 1030</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wrong, must be punished whether good comes of it or not, 655</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Yea, the</q> (2 Cor. 1:20) = objective certainty, 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Zechariah,</q> proper reading for <q>Jeremiah,</q> in Mat. 27:9, 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zoroastrianism, Parseeism, 185, 190, 382</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='1117'/><anchor id='Pg1117'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index Of Authors.</head>

<lg>
<l>Abbot, Ezra, 148, 152, 159, 165, 180, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbott, A. E., 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbott, F. E., 621</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbott, Lyman, 128, 201, 208, 379, 524, 589, 599, 694, 700, 720, 722, 732, 739, 768, 800, 896, 1005.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbott, T. K., 933</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abelard, Peter, 1, 34, 44, 734</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ackermann, C., 666</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adams, J. C., 1041</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adams, John, 228</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adams, John Quincy, 899</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adams, Nehemiah, 369</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adams, Thomas, 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adamson, Thomas, 133, 190, 314, 315, 439, 675, 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Addison, Joseph, 649, 988</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adeney, W. F., 985, 1020</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adkins, F., 822, 948</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ælfric, 505</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Æschylus, 111, 543, 723, 989</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Æsop, 369</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agassiz, Louis, 396, 481, 984</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ahrens, Henri, 536</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Aids to Faith,</q>, 139, 405</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Aids to Study of German Theology,</q>, 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albertus Magnus, 524</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcuin, Flaccus, 744</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alden, Joseph, 6, 11, 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aldrich, Anne Reeve, 155, 794</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander, Archibald, 51, 58, 101, 191, 301, 364, 488, 553, 557, 620, 644, 780, 912.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander, J. A., 654, 907, 1005</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander, J. W., 795, 845, 846</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander, W. L., 117, 131, 135, 151, 155, 157, 177, 189.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alford, Henry, 68, 150, 306, 377, 452, 1005</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alger, William R., 281, 493, 991</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allen, A. V. G., 32, 36, 44, 147, 208, 341, 343, 361, 399, 620, 636, 748, 800, 846.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allen, Grant, 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allison, W. H., 929</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambrose, 25, 48, 297, 619, 620</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>American Theological Review, 2, 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amiel, Henri F., 277, 280, 441, 599</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammon, Christoph F., 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amos, Sheldon, 534, 547</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amyraldus, Moses, 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anderson, F. L., 840, 939</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anderson, Galusha, 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anderson, Martin B., 11, 987</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andover Review, 122, 133, 643</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andrews, E. A., 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andrews, E. B., 182, 694, 892</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andrews, J. N., 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andrews, J. R., 840</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andrews, Lancelot, 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andrews, S. J., 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angelus Silesius, 101, 800</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angus, Joseph, 1045, 1056</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annotated Paragraph Bible, 141, 226, 232, 307, 423, 457, 574, 578, 650, 699, 761, 878, 934, 1025.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anselm, 34, 44, 86, 87, 89, 105, 279, 447, 487, 613, 630, 631, 675, 704, 748, 834, 849.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollinaris, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollos, 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Appleton, Jesse, 426</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aquinas, Thomas, 45, 443, 569, 613, 630, 631, 747, 750.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aratus, 526</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argyll, Duke of, 92, 99, 225, 389, 412, 435, 469, 474, 483, 528, 530, 536.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotle, 2, 33, 38, 40, 43, 44, 45, 58, 97, 120, 181, 184, 244, 252, 259, 262, 284, 378, 491, 516, 568, 579, 580, 581, 799, 814, 989, 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arius, 328</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arminius, J., 47, 602</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armitage, Thomas, 908, 973</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armour, J. M., 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armstrong, &mdash;&mdash;, 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnold, Albert N., 954, 959, 971, 972, 973, 974, 975, 979.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnold, Edwin, 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnold, Matthew, 21, 23, 102, 118, 139, 155, 188, 191, 192, 207, 252, 253, 526, 575, 989, 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnold, Thomas, 139, 156, 207, 237, 294, 557, 841.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnot, William, 659</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arthur, William, 350</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ascham, Roger, 576</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashmore, William, 292, 459, 636, 663, 759, 773, 936, 941, 945.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Askwith, E. H., 568</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asmus, P., 56</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1118'/><anchor id='Pg1118'/>

<lg>
<l>Athanasius, 44, 388, 620, 748, 997</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athenagoras, 998</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atwater, Lyman H., 97, 368, 637</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Auber, H., 398, 598</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Auberlen, C. A., 14, 131, 160</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Auerbach, Berthold, 871</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustine, 33, 44, 65, 83, 105, 119, 159, 227, 234, 276, 317, 344, 395, 413, 428, 488, 493, 518, 520, 521, 523, 537, 545, 557, 569, 570, 585, 586, 598, 599, 612, 613, 619, 620, 630, 631, 633, 707, 708, 784, 786, 788, 819, 887, 998, 1001, 1035.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Austin, John, 293, 533, 535</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baader, Franz von, 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babbage, Charles, 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babcock, Maltbie D., 208</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacon, B. W., 147, 148, 149, 167</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacon, Francis, 36, 40, 43, 71, 138, 262, 298, 514, 536, 541, 547, 583, 656, 722, 822, 982</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacon, L. W., and G. B., 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacon, Leonard, 330, 899, 918</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bähr, K. C. W. F., 722</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baer, K. E. von, 482</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bagehot, Walter, 224, 658</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bailey, G. E., 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bain, Alexander, 94, 96, 98</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baird, Samuel J., 49, 51, 404, 418, 494, 544, 555, 571, 576, 585, 589, 606, 607, 610, 611, 612, 615, 616, 619, 622, 630, 637, 640, 644, 647, 660, 680, 705, 754, 771, 802, 808.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baldwin, C. J., 109, 332, 488, 511, 592, 743</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baldwin, J. Mark, 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balfour, A. J., 3, 17, 18, 25, 43, 59, 100, 122, 125, 215, 292, 512, 568, 771, 834, 982, 987, 997.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balfour, R. G., 739</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bancroft, Bishop, 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bancroft, George, 899</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptist Magazine, 396</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptist Quarterly, 658, 918, 948</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptist Quarterly Review, 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptist Review, 207, 575, 998</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barclay, Robert, 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bardesanes, 383</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barlow, J. L., 1038</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barlow, J. W., 405</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barnabas, 147, 159, 235, 319</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barnes, Albert, 741, 907, 914</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barnes, Stephen G., 272</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barrett, Elizabeth, 571</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barrows, C. M., 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barrows, E. P., 700</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barrows, J. H., 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barrows, William, 1001</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barry, Alfred, 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bartlet, Vernon, 905</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bartlett, S. C., 172, 201, 227, 532, 660, 708, 989, 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bascom, John, 53, 55, 632</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basilides, 151, 160, 378, 670</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bastian, H. C., 389</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baudissin, Count W. W., 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baumgarten, M., 907</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baur, F. C., 145, 155, 157, 158, 160, 328, 382, 750.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bawden, H. H., 28, 346, 525, 616, 983, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baxter, Richard, 47, 48, 205, 218, 294, 872, 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bayle, Pierre, 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bayne, Peter, 100, 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beal, Samuel, 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beale, Lionel, 389</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beard, Charles, 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beard, G. H., 405</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beck, &mdash;&mdash;., 40</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beddoes, T. L., 380</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beebe, Alexander M., 957</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beecher, Edward, 488</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beecher, H. W., 42, 76, 128, 147, 269, 369, 406, 423, 790, 1047, 1052.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beecher, Lyman, 406</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beecher, Thomas K., 464</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beecher, Willis J., 141</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beet, J. A., 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Behrends, A. J. F., 25, 39, 42, 102, 367, 697, 755, 779.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belcher, Joseph,  908</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellamy, Joseph,  48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellarmine, R. P., 47, 522, 1001</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedict, Wayland R., 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bengel, J. A., 132, 222, 661, 683, 762, 782, 960, 1009.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bennett, W. H., 321</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bentham, Jeremy, 55, 439</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berdoe, Edward, 162, 765</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berkeley, George, 95, 96, 436</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernard, St., 58, 710</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernard, J. H., 120, 128, 129, 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernard, T. D., 177, 221, 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernhardt, Sarah, 544</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bersier, Eugene, 622, 821</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bertrand, H. G., Count de, 682</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beryl, 327</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Besant, Walter, 576, 737</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beyschlag, Willibald, 213, 221, 310, 622, 668.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beza, Theodore, 46, 777</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bible Commentary, 238, 374, 375, 376, 394, 396, 474, 583, 726.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bible Dictionary, Hastings', 118, 119, 141, 148, 153, 165, 167, 479, 514, 933.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bible Dictionary, Smith's, 118, 139, 147, 153, 166, 167, 447, 449, 456, 479, 728.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bibliotheca Fratrum Polonorum, 47, 729</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bibliotheca Sacra, 6, 11, 12, 14, 20, 21, 29, 42, 53, 56, 62, 103, 127, 160, 162, 201, 238, 528, 656, 790, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bickersteth, Edward, 437</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biedermann, A. Em., 68, 105, 119, 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Binet, Alfred, 454</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bingham, Joseph, 938</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birch, Samuel, 995</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birks, T. R., 174, 387, 488, 588, 615, 648</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1119'/><anchor id='Pg1119'/>

<lg>
<l>Bismarck, Otto von, 194, 401</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bissell, Edwin C., 166, 167, 170, 172, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bittinger, J. B., 650</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bixby, J. T., 65, 292, 300, 499, 530, 538, 985</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Black, William, 913, 1052</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackie, John Stuart, 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackstone, William, 656</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bledsoe, Albert T., 367, 520</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bleek, Friedrich, 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blount, Charles, 414</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blunt, John H., 2, 86, 146, 153, 330, 383, 414, 937.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blunt, John James, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boardman, George Dana, 19, 851, 942, 997.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boardman, H. A., 881</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boardman, W. E., 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bodemeyer, J., 706</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Böhl, Edward, 762</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boehme, Jacob, 255, 264, 524</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boerne, Ludwig, 561</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boethius, 253, 695</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boissier, M. L. Gaston, 989</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolingbroke, Viscount, 414</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonar, Horatius, 650, 889</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonnet, Charles, 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Book of the Dead,</q>, 989</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Booth, Ballington, 904</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Booth, William, 750</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bose, see <ref target='Index-Dubose'>Dubose, W. P.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bossuet, J. B., 47, 567, 821</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boston, Thomas, 48, 50, 802, 1018</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bowden, John, 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bowen, Francis, 11, 29, 63, 68, 98, 99, 113, 121, 405, 412, 991.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bowne, Borden P., 6, 8, 10, 11, 43, 52, 54, 56, 60, 61, 64, 68, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 78, 96, 97, 99, 103, 108, 110, 125, 219, 244, 257, 261, 267, 273, 279, 280, 282, 285, 286, 294, 300, 381, 402, 405, 413, 416, 428, 493, 499, 507, 508, 536, 539, 559, 625, 655, 678, 722, 756, 794, 985, 987.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boys, Thomas, 133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brace, C. L., 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bradford, A. H., 33, 60, 106, 406, 475, 516, 548, 594, 632, 635, 656, 677, 816, 818, 819, 1001, 1053.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bradley, F. H., 103, 276, 406, 505</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bramhall, John, 775</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brandi, S. M., 910</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breckenridge, Robert J., 49</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Bremen Lectures,</q>, 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brereton, C. H. S., 116</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bretschneider, K. G., 46, 523</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brewer, Prof., 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bridgman, Laura, 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Briggs, C. A., 140, 141, 489</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brinton, D. G., 476</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>British and Foreign Evangelical Review, 231, 347, 835, 845, 875.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>British Quarterly, 104, 116, 125, 152, 172, 300, 896.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>British Weekly, 738</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Broadus, John A., 117, 138, 216, 227, 364, 452, 780, 888, 892, 931, 933, 934, 937, 948, 951, 954, 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bronson, J. M., 466</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooke, Stopford A., 988</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooks, Kendall, 434, 950</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooks, Phillips, 42, 122, 348, 436, 694, 700, 735, 812, 830, 909, 913.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooks, Thomas, 463</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooks, W. K., 64, 124, 497, 536, 673</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brougham, Henry, 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, David, 105, 744, 1014</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, J. Baldwin, 131</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, John, 368</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, T. B., 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, William Adams, 321, 348, 596, 612, 638.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, W. R., 83, 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Browne, Sir Thomas, 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Browning, Elizabeth Barrett, 18, 59, 107, 441, 544, 571, 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Browning, Robert, 5, 38, 59, 62, 64, 107, 183, 193, 214, 218, 224, 252, 253, 262, 266, 273, 283, 298, 299, 312, 345, 366, 367, 369, 386, 398, 400, 403, 406, 420, 429, 439, 487, 489, 492, 496, 501, 506, 520, 544, 546, 549, 570, 581, 589, 642, 649, 651, 659, 692, 693, 703, 814, 987, 996, 1002, 1023, 1039.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brownson, Orestes, 37, 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bruce, A. Balmain, 105, 131, 133, 139, 145, 156, 157, 160, 186, 187, 217, 237, 238, 274, 341, 414, 465, 666, 676, 745, 786, 905.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bruch, J. F., 249, 293, 489, 491</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bryennios, Philotheos, 953</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buchanan, James, 95, 853</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buchanan, Robert, 1051</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buckle, H. T., 438</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buckley, J. M., 133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buckner, E. D., 985</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Büchner, Louis, 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bückmann, R., 128</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddeus, J. F., 46, 270</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bull, Bishop George, 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulwer, Edward, Lord Lytton, 645</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bunsen, J. C. C., 447, 956, 995</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bunyan, John, 40, 47, 221, 330, 462, 483, 544, 743, 827, 845, 888.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burbank, Luther, 632</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burgess, Ezenezer, 157, 477</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burgesse, Anthony, 630, 631</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burke, Edmund, 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burnet, Gilbert, 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burnet, Thomas, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burnham, Sylvester, 582</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burns, Robert, 525, 560, 575</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burrage, Henry S., 938</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burroughs, John, 469</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burton, E. D., 158, 376, 571, 941</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burton, N. S., 549, 941</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bushnell, Horace, 15, 26, 48, 103, 118, 133, 187, 245, 271, 294, 327, 335, 340, 369,
<pb n='1120'/><anchor id='Pg1120'/>
403, 433, 447, 502, 530, 541, 660, 668, 679, 728, 733, 734, 735, 736, 737, 738, 739, 813, 814, 956, 1036, 1041.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butcher, S. H., 38, 115, 406</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butler, Joseph, 30, 51, 71, 82, 114, 124, 232, 296, 300, 368, 417, 427, 668, 727, 771, 984.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butler, William Archer, 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butterworth, H., 437</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buttmann, Philip, 717</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byrom, John, 553</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byron, George Gordon, Lord, 369, 387, 404, 578.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>C. H. M., see <ref target='Index-MacIntosh'>MacIntosh, C. H.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cæsar, Julius, 151, 1032</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caillard, Emma Marie, 108, 470, 561, 679, 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caine, T. H. Hall, 495, 899</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caird, Edward, 6, 43, 58, 110</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caird, John, 6, 21, 22, 29, 101, 103, 255, 258, 261, 277, 346, 352, 361, 386, 400, 415, 514, 542, 567, 571, 572, 577, 623, 638, 641, 647, 685, 691, 694, 702, 756, 798, 806, 988, 1043.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cairns, John, 141</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calderwood, Henry, 5, 9, 10, 29, 34, 51, 58, 66, 67, 68, 74, 79, 85, 86, 87, 89, 93, 95, 101, 279, 302, 362, 437, 468, 500, 696, 985.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calixtus, Georgius, 45, 49, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calkins, P. W., 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calkins, Walcott, 979</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calovius, Abraham, 45, 52</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calthrop, Dr., 348</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calvin, John, 28, 38, 45, 51, 53, 107, 140, 227, 234, 334, 344, 409, 419, 420, 514, 558, 569, 612, 613, 621, 644, 663, 664, 749, 772, 777, 781, 783, 788, 794, 808, 881, 942, 960, 969, 1008, 1034, 1048.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Cambridge Platform,</q>, 904, 919</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campbell, Alexander, 821, 947</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campbell, George, 128</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campbell, James M., 798</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campbell, John M., 537, 548, 734, 737, 760.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canaletto, 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candlish, James S., 45, 340, 713</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candlish, Robert S., 476, 664, 726, 773</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canning, George, 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canus, Melchior, 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capes, J. M., 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carey, H. C., 536</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carlisle, Bishop of, 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carlyle, Jane, 745</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carlyle, Thomas, 8, 40, 251, 277, 299, 309, 329, 406, 414, 469, 575.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carman, A. S., 358, 410, 416</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caro, E. M., 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpenter, W. B., 11, 156, 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carson, Alexander, 938</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carson, J. C. L., 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carson, R. H., 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carter, Franklin, 638</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carus, Paul, 349</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cary, Phœbe, 987</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Case, Mary E., 102, 276, 279, 530</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catechism, Larger, 956</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Racovian, 47, 524</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman, 522</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shorter, 846, 956</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Westminster, 52, 664, 957</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholic Review, 957</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cattell, J. M., 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catullus, 989</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cave, A. B., 775</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cave, Arthur, 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celsus, 192, 274</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chadbourne, P. A., 469</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chadwick, J. W., 8, 126, 188, 198, 237, 304, 330, 473, 958, 990, 1051.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chalmers, Thomas, 48, 50, 124, 128, 141, 302, 394, 404, 415, 435, 616, 640, 820, 873, 1033.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chamberlain, Jacob, 431, 575</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chamberlin, T. C., 254, 510</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chambers, Arthur, 1044</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chambers, T. W., 17, 726, 941</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chamier, Daniel, 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chandler, Arthur, 582, 590</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Channing, William E., 12, 125, 694</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chapman, James, 330, 474</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charles, Elizabeth, 1026</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charles, R. H., 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charnock, Stephen, 244, 249, 259, 282, 283, 288, 362, 754, 826.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charteris, A. H., 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chase, D. P., 580</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chase, F. H., 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chatham, Lord, 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaucer, Geoffrey, 549</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chemnitz, Martin, 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheyne, T. K., 137, 250, 697, 933</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiba, Yugoro, 180</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chillingworth, W., 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chitty, Joseph, 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian Review, 747, 954, 1003</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian Union, 1046</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christlieb, Theodor, 5, 53, 95, 105, 117, 131, 132, 157, 160, 162, 351, 414.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrysostom, John, 39, 148, 796, 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Church Quarterly Review, 704</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cicero, IV., 40, 53, 300, 425, 429, 516, 575, 589, 598, 647, 814, 887, 989.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clark, G. W., 951</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarke, Dorus, 16</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarke, J. C. C., 246, 286, 755</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarke, J. Freeman, 58, 179, 186, 205, 329, 376, 394, 664, 729.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarke, Samuel, 73, 85, 86, 279, 301, 330</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarke, W. N., 4, 22, 43, 63, 68, 76, 88, 116, 145, 205, 210, 221, 255, 264, 269, 271, 280, 284, 286, 295, 387, 721, 855.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clay, Henry, 815</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement of Alexandria, 44, 154, 167, 235, 998, 1041.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1121'/><anchor id='Pg1121'/>

<lg>
<l>Clement of Rome, 149, 152, 153, 159, 312, 910, 928.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clifford, W. K., 399, 511</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clough, A. H., 259, 819</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coats, A. S., 769</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cobbe, Frances Power, 216, 404, 918, 981, 990, 991.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cocceius, Johannes, 46, 50, 612, 613</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cocker, B. F., 63, 414</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coe, E. B., 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coe, G. A., 599, 812</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colby, H. F., 978</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colegrove, F. W., 488, 489</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coleman, Lyman, 908, 911, 914, 937, 954</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coleridge, Hartley, 437, 495</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coleridge, Lord, 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coleridge, Samuel T., 4, 18, 24, 30, 54, 72, 124, 203, 205, 252, 424, 488, 562, 581, 611, 939.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colestock, H. T., 294, 721</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comte, Auguste, 6, 11, 57, 531, 567</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conant, T. J., 224, 225, 933, 937, 951</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conder, Josiah, 788</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Condillac, E. B. de, 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cone, Orello, 610</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congdon, H. W., 449</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine, 898</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantinople, Council of, 695</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Constitution of the Holy Apostles,</q>, 978</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contemporary Review, 95, 97</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conybeare and Howson, 668, 914, 936, 942.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cook, Joseph, 304, 344, 482, 537, 558, 1010.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cooke, J. P., 34, 194, 436, 468, 676</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corelli, Marie, 283, 542</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Correggio, 729</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cotterill, Henry, 397</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cotton, John, 904</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cousin, Victor, 55, 61, 63, 97</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cowper, B. H., 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cox, Samuel, 122, 156, 397, 437, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Craig, Oscar, 8</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cramer, H., 748</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cranch, C. P., 578</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crane, Frank, 21, 217, 230, 411, 425, 447, 599, 691, 841, 1047, 1050.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crapsey, A. S., 952</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crawford, Thomas J., 476, 721, 722, 727, 733, 735, 736, 744, 771, 836.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cremer, H., 221, 291, 484, 717, 721, 851, 887, 892, 935.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crippen, T. G., 748, 750</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crooker, J. H., 217, 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crookes, William, 252</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crooks and Hurst, 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crosby, Alpheus, 1015, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crosby, Fannie J., 515</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crosby, Howard, 710</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Croskery, Thomas, 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crowell, William, 929</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cudworth, Ralph, 321, 376, 380, 1025</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Culver, S. W., 757</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cumming, John, 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cunningham, John, 935, 952, 980</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cunningham, William, 41, 368, 523, 614, 619, 640, 644, 744, 773, 779, 823, 912.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curry, Daniel, 285, 745</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Current Discussions in Theology,</q>, 626, 695, 767.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curtis, E. L., 167</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curtis, T. F., 89, 157, 179, 723, 892, 900, 906, 940, 952, 956, 959, 972, 973, 977, 980</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curtiss, S. I., 538</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curtius, Georg, 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuvier, Georges, 77, 444</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyprian, 33, 152, 620, 901, 1001</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyril, 342</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyrus, 989</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dabney, R. L., 49, 418, 497, 601, 603, 616, 864.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dagg, J. L., 892, 896, 900, 926, 933, 951, 959.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daggett, Dr., 518</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dale, J. W., 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dale, R. W., 42, 148, 238, 272, 369, 592, 632, 636, 654, 680, 721, 735, 750, 754, 759, 802, 803, 806, 854, 929.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalgairns, J. B., 8</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalman, G. H., 313, 889</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damien, Peter, 364, 757</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dana, James D., 224, 395, 396, 403, 473, 481.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danforth, G. F., 771</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dannhauer, J. C., 45, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dante Alighieri, 45, 138, 256, 263, 277, 443, 447, 451, 492, 569, 653, 987, 1001, 1009, 1041, 1053.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>D'Arcy, C. F., 35, 291, 332</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darwin, Charles, 36, 57, 64, 468, 473, 480, 526, 534.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darwin, G. H., 477</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daub, Carl, 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davids, Rhys, 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davidson, A. B., 134, 217, 667</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davidson, Samuel, 897, 929</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davis, J. W., 652</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dawkins, W. Boyd, 532</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dawson, J. W., 64, 412, 482, 525, 532</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Day, H. N., 24, 213, 345, 504</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Declaratory Act, Free Church of Scotland, 641</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>DeCoverley, Sir Roger, 649</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deems, C. F., 901</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Defoe, Daniel, 431</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delbœuf, Joseph, 550</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delitzsch, Franz, 137, 227, 477, 484, 487, 510, 520, 644, 647, 697, 701, 850, 998, 1003, 1023, 1039.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Marchi, Joseph, 191</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denney, James, 18, 214, 237, 339, 590, 596, 633, 639, 640, 650, 721, 734, 738, 774, 781, 843, 853, 940, 1011, 1025, 1040, 1041</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1122'/><anchor id='Pg1122'/>

<lg>
<l>Denovan, Joshua, 339, 548, 710, 711, 819, 858, 860.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Quincey, Thomas, 128, 1003</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Descartes, René, 55, 262, 279, 299, 1002</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deutsch, Emanuel, 675</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-DeWette'/>
<l>DeWette, W. M. L., 15, 41, 46, 153, 517, 614, 661, 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dewey, John, 22, 40, 43, 51, 251, 252, 281, 300, 502, 505, 506, 982.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Witt, John, 43, 778</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dexter, Henry M., 892, 901, 903, 907, 911, 914, 916, 917, 918, 924, 928, 929, 937, 952, 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dick, John, 48, 269, 353, 358</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dickens, Charles, 223, 492</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dickey, F. O., 663</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dickson, W. P., 562</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Didache</hi>, 159, 311, 410, 892, 906, 937, 938.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diestel, Ludwig, 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dillmann, August, 169, 268, 375, 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diman, J. L., 6, 66, 72, 76, 77, 79, 82, 84, 95, 104, 113, 129, 414, 433, 435, 438, 532, 535, 801.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dinsmore, C. A., 646</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diognetus, 147, 311</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysius, 274, 910</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dippel, J. K., 744</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disraeli, Benjamin, 135, 447</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dix, Morgan, 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dobney, H. H., 998, 1036</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doddridge, Philip, 453</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dodge, Ebenezer, 146, 448, 590</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dods, Marcus, 158, 181, 321, 337, 394, 938.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Döederlein, L., 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Döllinger, J. J. I., 888, 935</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dorner, A. J., 523</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dorner, I. A., 5, 13, 18, 21, 29, 30, 33, 34, 46, 51, 62, 69, 87, 104, 106, 118, 159, 187, 208, 238, 245, 253, 259, 265, 271, 274, 275, 278, 282, 296, 305, 309, 320, 324, 328, 331, 333, 337, 338, 344, 386, 388, 408, 411, 412, 413, 418, 439, 493, 523, 549, 550, 555, 565, 569, 596, 598, 599, 600, 604, 615, 620, 621, 631, 651, 654, 656, 669, 670, 671, 672, 673, 676, 677, 680, 683, 685, 688, 689, 693, 694, 695, 698, 699, 702, 707, 709, 721, 737, 741, 746, 754, 761, 767, 776, 793, 799, 816, 830, 842, 864, 866, 893, 911, 947, 964, 967, 981, 991, 1002, 1014, 1017, 1021, 1024, 1036, 1039, 1051.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Douglas, Frederick, 439</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dove, Patrick E., 2, 3, 29, 39, 66, 71, 85, 86, 87, 103.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doyle, Father, 958</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dreiäuglein, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Driver, S. R., 164, 166, 223</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drummond, Henry, 26, 34, 224, 264, 266, 401, 441, 466, 528, 539, 804, 806, 814, 824, 827, 923.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dubois, A. J., 60, 122, 810</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dubois, Eugene, 471</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dubose'/>
<l>Dubose, W. P., 18</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dudley, H. E., 803</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Düsselfhoff, 338, 828</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duff, Alexander, 900</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duncan, G. M., 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duncan, John, 105, 213</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunn, Martha Baker, 364</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duns Scotus, Johannes, 45, 244, 262, 299.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Du Prel, Karl, 550</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duryea, Dr., 364</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dwight, Timothy, 48, 300, 323, 573, 593, 608, 820, 826, 936, 977, 1049.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dwinell, J. E., 550</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eaches, O. P., 222</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebers, Georg, 995</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebrard, J. H. A., 21, 46, 52, 62, 72, 174, 217, 338, 449, 462, 477, 485, 493, 514, 679, 686, 762, 945, 1022.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eccles, Robert Kerr, 37, 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eddy, Mary Baker G., 573</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edersheim, Alfred, 141, 172, 227, 902</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edison, Thomas A., 206</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edwards, Jonathan, 19, 36, 48, 49, 50, 51, 208, 219, 263, 265, 270, 271, 278, 290, 299, 300, 333, 342, 362, 364, 365, 366, 399, 401, 402, 416, 417, 442, 461, 494, 504, 507, 518, 554, 555, 556, 557, 571, 577, 582, 585, 586, 593, 594, 595, 607, 612, 613, 619, 622, 637, 644, 668, 683, 699, 751, 754, 790, 800, 805, 808, 818, 820, 826, 840, 843, 845, 862, 864, 867, 868, 886, 952, 953, 971, 1008, 1029, 1035, 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edwards, Jonathan, Jr., 275, 278, 358, 362, 504, 999, 1051.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eichhorn, Carl, 105, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elam, Charles, 635</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elder, William, 118, 121</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eliot, George, 210, 492, 561, 575, 766, 988, 1048.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ellicott, C. J., 35, 307, 318, 341, 450, 782, 856, 1017.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elliott, E. B., 139, 151, 449, 910, 1001, 1009, 1010, 1013, 1015.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ellis, George E., 308, 350, 598, 729</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emerson, G. H., 1040</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emerson, R. W., 4, 39, 97, 107, 119, 139, 151, 175, 203, 207, 256, 287, 296, 330, 406, 409, 416, 441, 496, 539, 567, 575, 609, 613, 643, 653, 724, 730, 804, 841, 1025, 1041.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emmons, Nathanael, 48, 359, 415, 416, 585, 606, 607, 608, 613, 823.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Empedocles, 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Encyclopædia Britannica, 96, 149, 156, 191, 300, 411, 524, 586, 749, 750, 893.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Endless Future, The,</q>, 1054</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epictetus, 185, 425</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epicurus, 184, 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epiphanius, 319, 669</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Episcopius, Simon, 47, 602</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erasmus, 36, 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erdmann, J. E., 101</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1123'/><anchor id='Pg1123'/>

<lg>
<l>Ernesti, H. F. T. L., 491, 563</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Errett, Isaac, 947</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erskine, Lord, 986</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erskine, Thomas, 351, 787</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Estes, H. C., 998</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euripides, 582</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eusebius, 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evans, Christmas, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evans, L. J., 229, 706, 999</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Everett, C. C., 2, 6, 695, 731, 990</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ewald, J. L., 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Expositor, 1025</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Expositor's Greek Testament, 135, 699, 719, 948.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faber, F. W., 301, 334, 776</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faber, G. S., 1014</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fabri, Friedrich, 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fairbairn, A. M., 20, 59, 62, 63, 125, 159, 186, 335, 354, 366, 403, 507, 536, 579, 755, 910, 991.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fairbairn, Patrick, 15, 135, 449, 668, 726, 791, 1015.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fairchild, James H., 300, 504, 559</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Faith and Free Thought,</q>, 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Faiths of the World,</q>, 179</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farley, Robert G., 773</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farrar, A. S., 53, 132, 135, 158, 403, 420, 427, 433, 459.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farrar, F. W., 112, 124, 129, 132, 135, 141, 157, 160, 179, 187, 193, 385, 428, 451, 456, 479, 585, 666, 679, 989, 1039, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farrer, J. A., 180</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faunce, D. W., 501</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faunce, W. H. P., 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fechner, G. T., 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felix of Urgella, 744</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferguson, W. L., 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferrier, J. F., 469</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feuerbach, L., 14, 83, 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fichte, J. G., 3, 40, 97, 407, 467, 510, 616.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fick, August, 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finney, C. G., 48, 238, 262, 278, 291, 299, 300, 367, 546, 783, 818, 877.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firmilianus, 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fischer, Kuno, 512</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fish, E. J., 896, 901, 916, 918, 924</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fisher, G. P., 2, 4, 15, 21, 22, 34, 37, 40, 41, 49, 51, 53, 58, 60, 65, 70, 71, 72, 79, 87, 102, 115, 117, 121, 130, 131, 132, 150, 152, 179, 189, 191, 202, 228, 231, 237, 305, 424, 453, 456, 508, 532, 545, 580, 607, 608, 613, 615, 616, 617, 664, 668, 936, 969, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiske, D. T., 358</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiske, John, 97, 104, 369, 559, 844, 899, 900, 908, 953, 985, 987.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fitch, E. T., 365, 554, 783</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fitzgerald, Prof., 416</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fleming, William, 6, 33, 53, 539</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flint, Austin, 389</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flint, Robert, 6, 58, 63, 66, 73, 75, 79, 80, 81, 85, 100, 112, 367, 404, 929.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fock, Otto, 733</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fonsegrive, G. L., 512</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forbes, Archibald, 228</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forbes, G. M., 12, 43, 102, 291, 360</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forbes, John, 360</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ford, David B., 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Formula of Concord, 792</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Formula of Consensus, 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forrest, D. W., 189, 675, 988</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forrest, Edwin, 577</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forster, W. E., 990</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forsyth, P. T., 26, 755</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foster, G. B., 120, 197, 201, 299, 305, 311, 444, 720, 733, 741, 750, 755, 765, 798.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foster, John, 35, 128, 1043</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foster, R. V., 228, 783</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Foundations of our Faith,</q>, 5, 79, 865</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fox, Caroline, 461</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fox, George, 48, 1056</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fox, L. A., 1029</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fox, Norman, 215, 663, 949, 959</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Francis de Sales, 32</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Francis of Assisi, 33, 984</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frank, F. H. R., 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frank, Sebastian, 800</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franklin, Benjamin, 363, 431</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fraser, A. C, 63, 417</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freer, G., 744</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>French, Clara, 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frere, B., 844</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Froschammer, J., 491, 493, 494</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frothingham, A. L., 380</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Froude, James A., 368, 438, 564</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fürst, Julius, 669</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fuller, Andrew, 15, 47, 50, 51, 52, 368, 773, 793, 808, 826, 829, 1018.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fuller, Margaret, 369</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fuller, Thomas, 128, 290, 633</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fullerton, G. S., 255, 1021</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galton, Francis, 83, 439, 492, 495, 496, 632.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gambold, John, 888</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gannett, W. C., 202, 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ganse, H. G., 351</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garbett, Edward, 112, 177, 179, 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garbett, James, 776</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gardiner, F., 137, 139, 227, 322</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gardiner, H. N., 104, 137</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garibaldi, Giuseppe, 766</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garrison, W. E., 947</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garvie, A. E., 6, 270</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gassendi, Pierre, 298, 373</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gates, Errett, 948</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaussen, L., 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gear, H. L., 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geddie, John, 900</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geikie, Archibald, 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geikie, Cunningham, 156, 661</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gemara, 931</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genung, J. F., 115, 300, 459, 994</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>George, Henry, 530, 748</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>George, N. D., 1056</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1124'/><anchor id='Pg1124'/>

<lg>
<l>Gerhard, John, 4, 45, 244, 261, 969</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerhardt, Paul, 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerhart, E. V., 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gesenius, William, 944</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gess, W. F., 102, 686, 687, 688, 704</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geulinx, Arnold, 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gibbon, Edward, 47, 192, 204, 682, 966</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giesebrecht, Friedrich, 134</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gieseler, J. C. L., 382, 914</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gifford, Lord, 413</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gifford, O. P., 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilbert, George H., 321</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilder, R. W., 683</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gildersleeve, B. L., 988</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilfillan, George, 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gill, John, 47, 793</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gillespie, William H., 62, 73, 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Girdlestone, R. B., 850, 864, 892</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gladden, Washington, 56, 120, 122, 140, 141, 237, 956.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gladstone, W. E., 44, 122, 223, 314, 396</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glennie, J. S. Stuart-, 527</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gloatz, Paul, 122</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Godet, F., 21, 131, 150, 152, 158, 258, 261, 309, 335, 337, 448, 487, 584, 758, 763.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Göschel, C. F., 110, 484, 491</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goethe, J. W. von, 3, 20, 21, 24, 39, 40, 60, 101, 117, 120, 188, 224, 309, 386, 444, 455, 458, 511, 517, 520, 542, 558, 561, 562, 575, 645, 691, 814, 990.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goodwin, D. R., 483, 485, 1017</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goodwin, Thomas, 576</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goodwin, W. W., 933</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gordon, A. J., 128, 133, 138, 140, 216, 234, 274, 281, 285, 333, 359, 475, 529, 604, 705, 732, 737, 775, 776, 782, 824, 834, 847, 848, 889, 893, 901, 910, 911, 913, 927, 935, 948, 1004, 1013, 1014, 1016, 1022.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gordon, George A., 17, 19, 28, 65, 188, 346, 348, 397, 402, 405, 415, 492, 502, 542, 732, 751, 790.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gordon, H. A., 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gore, Charles, 12, 16, 25, 33, 112, 113, 120, 121, 129, 164, 173, 187, 198, 214, 218, 229, 240, 305, 321, 329, 333, 340, 351, 389, 414, 500, 598, 671, 673, 679, 783, 911, 1001.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gough, John B., 641</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goulbourn, E. M., 1023, 1054</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gould, E. P., 720, 1046</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gould, S. Baring-, 316, 326, 377, 457, 562, 722, 733, 915, 933, 1004, 1007.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grafton, Bishop, 955</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grant, U. S., 430</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gratry, &mdash;&mdash;, 267</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grau, R. F., 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gray, Asa, 470, 478</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Great Religions of the World,</q>, 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Green, J. R., 149, 557</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Green, T. H., 19, 43, 176, 505, 615</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Green, W. H., 167, 172, 225, 231, 375, 477, 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greenleaf, Simon, 141</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greg, W. R., 135, 548, 758</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregorovius, Ferdinand, 631</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory the Great, 1001</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory, D. S., 302, 447, 504</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory Nazianzen, 1, 748, 917</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory Nyssenus, 44, 493, 620, 747</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gretillat, Augustin, 49</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grey, Lady Jane, 33</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Griffin, E. P., 733</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grimm, K. L. W., 782</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grimm-Wilke, 717, 935</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grisi, Mme., 650</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gröbler, Paul, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grote, George, 156, 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grotius, Hugo, 47, 740, 741, 1009</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gubelmann, J. S., 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guericke, H. E. F., 330, 379, 382, 384, 672, 744, 907.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guizot, F., 193, 409</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gulick, J. T., 530</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gulliver, Julia H., 506</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gunsaulus, F. W., 4, 122, 350</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guyon, Mme. de la Motte, 32, 782</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guyot, Arnold, 224, 374, 395, 477</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gwatkin, Henry, 329</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hackett, H. B., 27, 113, 157, 452, 733, 907, 915, 946, 999, 1005.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadley, James, 585, 586, 991</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadrian, 990</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haeckel, Ernst, 343, 471, 496</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hagenbach, K. P., 14, 36, 41, 44, 49, 50, 51, 321, 323, 331, 382, 523, 601, 603, 607, 621, 744, 833, 903.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hahn, Aaron, 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hahn, G. L., 483</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hales, William, 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haley, John W., 174, 228, 1054</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hall, Charles Cuthbert, 770</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hall, Edwin, 938</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hall, G. Stanley, 812</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hall, James, 482</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hall, John, 589, 977</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hall, Joseph, 836</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hall, Robert, 47, 70, 74, 463, 793, 820, 932, 972, 977, 978, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hallam, A. H., 115, 214, 303, 368, 437, 703.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haller, &mdash;&mdash;, 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamerton, P. G., 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamilton, D. H., 121, 437</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamilton, Sir Wm., 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 34, 39, 40, 66, 74, 96, 98, 121, 153, 516, 1002.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamlin, Cyrus, 350</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hammond, W. A., 281, 590</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanna, W. T. C., 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanna, William, 699, 1018</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanne, J. W., 105, 415</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hare, Julius Charles, 317, 555, 898</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harnack, A., 46, 125, 130, 148, 152, 153, 154, 158, 163, 208, 379, 433, 446, 456, 598, 621, 683, 722, 729, 911, 935, 937.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harnoch, G. A., 382</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1125'/><anchor id='Pg1125'/>

<lg>
<l>Harris, &mdash;&mdash;, 467</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harris, George, 26, 203, 293, 494, 571, 701, 787.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harris, J. H., 103, 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harris, J. Rendel, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harris, Samuel, 11, 51, 52, 60, 64, 65, 67, 69, 72, 92, 100, 133, 180, 204, 253, 255, 291, 468, 486, 509, 572, 600, 654, 695, 700, 1014, 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harris, W. T., 43, 62, 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harrison, Frederick, 19, 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hart, A. S., 458</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hartmann, E. von, 78, 80, 105, 404</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hartmann, Robert, 473</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harvey, H., 42, 897, 917, 929, 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harvey, Lord, 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hase, Karl, 49, 50, 51, 158, 518, 558, 583, 621, 686, 702, 991, 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hastings' Bible Dictionary, 118, 119, 141, 148, 153, 165, 167, 394, 479, 514, 933.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hatch, Edwin, 27, 44, 146, 255, 321, 389, 666, 700, 840, 897, 913.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haug, Martin, 382</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haven, Joseph, 301, 437, 504</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 363, 400, 405, 496, 578, 645.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hay, John, 587</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hazard, R. G., 39, 279, 362, 504, 794, 814</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heagle, David, 982</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heard, J. B., 484</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heber, Reginald, 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebert, C., 968</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hedge, F. H., 75, 377, 404</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hegel, G. W. F., 20, 27, 42, 55, 100, 101, 115, 176, 344, 378, 407, 550, 581, 653.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heine, Heinrich, 23, 104, 345, 562, 567</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helmholtz, H. L. F., 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hemphill, Samuel, 148, 149, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henderson, E., 128, 198, 199, 200, 204, 210, 216, 322, 614.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hengstenberg, E. W., 319, 659, 668, 1009, 1010, 1014.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henly, William Ernest, 507</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henry VIII, 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henry, Matthew, 525, 743, 772</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henslow, George, 469, 815</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henson, P. S., 122, 920</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heraclitus, 222, 506</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herbert of Cherbury, Lord Edward, 37, 414.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herbert, George, 15, 34, 37, 355, 414</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herbert, Thomas M., 11, 66, 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herder, J. G., 46, 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermann, &mdash;&mdash;, 46, 900</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermas, 159, 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herodotus, 181, 250, 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herrick, C. L., 252</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herrick, Robert, 362</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herron, G. D., 570</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herschel, J. F. W., 91, 99, 412</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hersey, H. E., 194, 436</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hershon, P. I., 501</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hervey, Arthur C., 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herzog, Encyclopædia, 21, 33, 91, 158, 187, 368, 377, 382, 404, 444, 617, 670, 686, 700, 754, 868, 998, 1003, 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hesiod, 391, 526</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hickok, L. P., 10, 43, 53, 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hicks, L. E., 75, 225, 403</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilary (Hilarius), 619, 620</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hildebrand, 905</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilgenfeld, A. B. C. C., 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hill, D. J., 8, 51, 58, 98, 120, 195, 319, 467, 586.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hill, George, 358, 368</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hill, Rowland, 577, 789</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hill, Thomas, 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hillel, 931</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilprecht, H. V., 532</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hinton, James, 5, 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hippolytus, 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hiscox, Edward T., 929</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hitchcock, Edward, 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hitchcock, R. D., 897, 1017</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hobbes, Thomas, 40, 124, 298, 461, 567</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hodge, A. A., 49, 50, 121, 198, 323, 353, 362, 435, 486, 557, 586, 644, 688, 693, 710, 712, 728, 784, 794, 795, 836, 862, 910, 1014, 1029, 1044, 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hodge, Charles, 1, 21, 27, 28, 30, 33, 49, 51, 52, 53, 100, 103, 132, 198, 213, 217, 272, 300, 328, 362, 397, 404, 413, 418, 420, 453, 480, 491, 514, 557, 559, 582, 587, 602, 612, 614, 616, 619, 622, 643, 655, 664, 686, 688, 691, 696, 706, 708, 741, 771, 781, 784, 792, 820, 825, 843, 846, 868, 881, 929, 982, 1001, 1052.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hodge, C. W., 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hodgson, S. H., 5, 15, 100, 288, 512</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Höffding, H., 458, 467</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hofmann, J. C. K. von, 41, 68, 320, 519, 686, 722.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hofmann, R. H., 503</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holbach, Baron Paul H. d', 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holland, H. S., 22, 838</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holland, J. G., 91, 246</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hollaz, David, 45, 261, 558, 615</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holliman, Ezekiel, 949</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holmes, O. W., 369, 405, 496, 643, 755, 984.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holzmann, &mdash;&mdash;, 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homer, 161, 404</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hood, Thomas, 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hooker, Richard, 48, 209, 218, 518, 538, 548, 584, 686, 700, 781, 787, 808, 896, 897, 929.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hopkins, Mark, 4, 6, 25, 58, 77, 79, 93, 95, 120, 121, 122, 251, 270, 300, 301, 374, 380, 404, 405, 406, 416, 434, 435, 438, 450, 469, 503, 524, 525, 529, 537, 571, 679, 815, 839, 842.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hopkins, Samuel, 48, 271, 415, 416, 417, 467, 494, 518, 567, 593, 606, 607, 608, 613, 643, 754, 771, 772, 820, 842.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1126'/><anchor id='Pg1126'/>

<lg>
<l>Horace, 124, 156, 190, 294, 581</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hort, F. J. A., 154, 905</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hovey, Alvah, 5, 34, 45, 50, 102, 114, 147, 153, 155, 197, 223, 227, 230, 255, 273, 307, 316, 388, 404, 469, 486, 544, 567, 618, 624, 629, 636, 662, 681, 688, 696, 697, 700, 702, 708, 721, 735, 738, 739, 756, 779, 782, 784, 786, 787, 823, 825, 852, 881, 890, 938, 954, 960, 980, 982, 984, 985, 992, 998, 999, 1003, 1008, 1012, 1023, 1038, 1039, 1054.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Howard, George E., 530</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Howe, John, 47, 48, 52, 333, 334, 516</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Howell, R. B. C., 918, 980</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Howland, S. W., 526</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Howson, J. S., 160</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hudson, C. F., 998, 1036</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hudson, Thomas J., 465</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hudson, Thompson J., 281, 381, 454, 458, 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hughes, Archbishop, 959</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hughes, Thomas, 570, 679</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hugo, Victor, 56, 453, 984</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humboldt, Alexander von, 1, 259, 412, 480.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hume, David, 43, 57, 73, 95, 121, 127, 135, 175, 433, 893, 997, 1001.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunt, A. E., 529</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunt, John, 100, 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huntingdon, Wm., 766, 907</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hurter, H., 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huther, J. E., 307, 902</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hutter, Leonhard, 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hutton, R. H., 27, 59, 67, 70, 82, 100, 125, 131, 160, 162, 192, 204, 347, 351, 408, 440, 511, 561, 564, 565, 571, 646, 667, 777, 982.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huxley, Thomas, 57, 60, 76, 83, 94, 96, 124, 127, 389, 392, 396, 466, 468, 470, 471, 472, 480, 502, 575, 990.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyde, W. D., 433</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyslop, James H., 654</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iamblicus, 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ignatius, 44, 149, 159, 311, 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illingworth, J. R., 4, 53, 72, 128, 253, 346.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immer, A., 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Independent, 977</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inge, W. R., 31, 33, 237, 311, 800, 841</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ingelow, Jean, 1042</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ingersoll, Robert G., 38, 135, 159, 365, 496, 570, 1050.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ingham, Richard, 934, 951</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Interior, 977</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ireland, W. W., 207, 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irenæus, 147, 152, 319, 620, 910, 998</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irving, Edward, 132, 439, 744, 745, 746, 747, 759.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isocrates, 180, 222</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Issel, Ernst, 274</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iverach, James, 11, 79, 97</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jackson, A. V. W., 382</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jackson, A. W., 103, 407, 501, 649, 1047</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jackson, William, 1056</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacob, G. A., 887, 896, 912, 914, 915, 917, 948, 952, 960, 961, 965, 980.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacobi, F. H., 14, 29, 46, 61, 81, 838, 951</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jahn, Johann, 722</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jahrbuch für deutsche Theologie, 708, 754, 1018.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James, William, 4, 33, 42, 55, 94, 96, 98, 111, 122, 182, 274, 276, 281, 338, 403, 435, 467, 468, 488, 504, 511, 536, 748, 806, 811, 829, 831, 841, 985, 988, 1002.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Janet, Paul, 62, 75, 79, 91, 262, 401, 404, 435, 504.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Janósik, &mdash;&mdash;, 525</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jansen, Cornelius, 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jastrow, Morris, Jr., 408</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jefferson, Charles E., 953</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jellett, J. H., 232, 437</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jenkyn, Thomas W., 773</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jensen, &mdash;&mdash;, 408</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerome, 148, 152, 159, 429, 491, 597, 796, 914, 915.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerrold, Douglas, 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jevons, W. S., 66, 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John of Damascus, 44, 344, 487, 671, 673, 695.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John the Evangelist, 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johns, C. H. W., 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson, E. H., 201, 281, 293, 297, 339, 340, 347, 357, 376, 377, 383, 743, 785, 792, 824, 854, 957, 1017.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson, F. H., 25, 407, 470</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson, Franklin, 153, 235, 403</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson, Herrick, 779</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson, Samuel, 36, 297, 525, 560, 575, 1047.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson's Cyclopædia, 1047</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnstone, Robert, 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jones, E. Griffith, 119, 466, 528, 583, 625, 657, 852.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jones, Henry, 101, 103, 108, 266, 291, 406, 540.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jonson, Ben, 461</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Josephus, 144, 166, 226, 448, 947, 996</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jouffroy, T. S., 301, 1002</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Journal of Christian Philosophy, 96</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jowett, Benjamin, 728, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judson, Adoniram, 194, 938, 960</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jukes, Andrew, 726, 1039</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julian, 598</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justin Martyr, 148, 152, 319, 410, 665, 671, 675, 747, 997.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juvenal, 156</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kähler, Martin, 503</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaftan, J. W. M., 5, 14, 21, 25, 45, 46, 207, 274, 520, 568, 569, 574, 649, 752, 839, 856.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kahnis, K. F. A., 14, 20, 46, 52, 200, 243, 247, 261, 491, 493, 652, 696, 702, 705, 795, 929.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kane, Elisha Kent, 40, 765</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1127'/><anchor id='Pg1127'/>

<lg>
<l>Kant, Immanuel, 4, 6, 10, 21, 29, 43, 46, 53, 55, 61, 73, 75, 77, 79, 82, 85, 86, 87, 95, 401, 427, 488, 489, 498, 502, 504, 510, 536, 545, 581, 643, 655, 800, 813, 839, 988, 1002.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keane, A. H., 471, 477, 530</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keats, John, 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keble, John, 139, 526, 583, 675</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kedney, J. S., 379</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keen, W. W., 59, 731</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keil, J. K. F., 477, 722</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keim, Theodor, 131</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keller, Helen, 66, 216, 478</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kellogg, S. H., 182, 352, 1044</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kelly, William, 1009, 1015</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kelso, J. A., 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kempis, Thomas à, 32, 556</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ken, Thomas, 916</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kendall, Amos, 893</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kendall, Henry, 622</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kendrick, A. C., 152, 234, 316, 627, 661, 699, 708, 934, 947, 952, 1004, 1014, 1033.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kennard, J. S., 648</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kennedy, John, 131</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kenyon, F. G., 141, 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kidd, Benjamin, 17, 194, 426, 567, 813, 981.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kilpatrick, T. B., 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King, H. C., 125, 328</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King, H. M., 427, 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kingsley, Charles, 183, 305, 421, 442, 473</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kipling, Rudyard, 420</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kirk, Dr., 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kitto, John, 932</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kloppenburg, John, 614</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knapp, Georg Christian, 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knight, William A., 43, 53, 59, 73, 104, 105, 327, 387, 434, 754.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knobel, August, 726</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knox, Alexander, 853</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knox, John, 134</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Köhler, H. O., 621</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koran, 420, 578</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Krabbe, Otto, 660</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Krauth, C. P., 664</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kreibig, G., 298, 403, 569, 633, 659, 750, 754, 765.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Krüger, Paul, 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Külpe, Oswald, 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kuenen, A., 134, 155, 170, 171, 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kurtz, J. H., 51, 168, 172, 320, 394, 415, 660, 667, 668, 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kuyper, Abraham, 338, 667</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lachelier, J. E. N., 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lacouperie, A. Terrien de, 479</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lactantius, 2, 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ladd, G. T., 4, 10, 43, 55, 56, 61, 66, 70, 91, 106, 110, 121, 198, 205, 249, 263, 275, 361, 416, 459, 486, 495, 498, 499, 506, 509, 534, 537, 550, 916, 929, 958, 985, 1003, 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamb, Charles, 312, 644</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lang, G. A., 298, 531</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lange, F. A., 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lange, J. L. F., 20, 46, 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lange, J. P., 51, 333, 382, 661, 722, 761, 781, 853, 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lanier, Sidney, 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lankester, E. Ray, 229, 528</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lao-tze, 351</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>La Place, P. S. de, 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lardner, Nathaniel, 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lasaulx, Ernest von, 727</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lasher, G. W., 948</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laurie, S. S., 511</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Law, William, 303, 557</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lawrence, E. A.,697, 754, 1042</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lawrence, William, 133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laycock, Thomas, 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leathes, Stanley, 140, 168, 177, 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-LeBon'/>
<l>LeBon, Gustave, 488</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lecky, W. E. H., 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>LeConte, Joseph, 77, 110, 225, 250, 395, 396, 469, 474.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lee, G. S., 125, 237, 264, 362</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>LeFanu, Joseph S., 575</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legge, James, 56, 180, 225, 531</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leibnitz, G. W., 29, 43, 46, 63, 404, 405, 563.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leighton, Robert, 401, 873</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leitch, William, 450, 1033</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lemme, Ludwig, 652</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lenormant, F., 224, 225, 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo the Great, 750</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lepsius, K. R., 910</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lessing, G. E., 30, 173, 510, 520</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Letson, see <ref target='Index-LeBon'>LeBon, Gustave</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lewes, G. H., 64, 194, 251, 380, 533</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lewis, Mrs. A. S., 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leydecker, Melchior, 46, 49, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lias, J. J., 759, 760</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lichtenberg, &mdash;&mdash;, 98</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lichtenberger, F., 748</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liddell and Scott, 933</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liddon, Henry P., 21, 51, 58, 190, 307, 309, 311, 314, 315, 321, 437, 491, 683.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lidgett, J. S., 295, 528, 726, 732, 750, 754, 756.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liebner, Th. A., 686, 690, 702</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Life, 512</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lightfoot, J. B., 24, 35, 151, 160, 187, 311, 335, 341, 379, 379, 452, 485, 706, 912, 915, 916, 928, 929, 934, 938, 945, 953.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lightfoot, John, 452</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lightwood, J. M., 535</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lillie, Arthur, 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lillie, John, 294, 993, 1005, 1053</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lilly, W. S., 112</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Limborch, Philipp von, 47, 524, 602</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lincoln, Abraham, 231, 272, 516, 517, 596, 847, 900, 939.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lincoln, Heman, 1049</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lincoln, William, 800</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lindsay, T. M., 897</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lindsay, W. L., 469</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lindsley, Philip, 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lipsius, Richard A., 46, 380, 404</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1128'/><anchor id='Pg1128'/>

<lg>
<l>Lisle, W. M., 17, 486, 561</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Litch, Josiah, 1015</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Litton, E. A., 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Livingstone, David, 56, 900</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lobstein, Paul, 676</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Locke, John, 43, 54, 63, 73, 81, 95, 213, 444, 899, 1002.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lockhart, B. W., 330, 560, 736</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lockhart, John G., 449</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lockyer, J. N., 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lodge, Oliver J., 416, 512</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loeb, Jacques, 119, 525, 676, 1003</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loisy, Alfred, 683</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lombard, Peter, 44, 613, 704</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lombroso, Cesare, 496</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Long, J. C, 44, 937</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Longfellow, H. W., 224, 400, 984, 985, 987, 1042.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lopp, W. T., 477</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Lord's Supper, The, A Clerical Symposium,</q>, 964</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lorimer, James, 536</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lorimer, P., 160</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lotz, Gulielmus, 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lotze, Hermann, 4, 6, 8, 12, 38, 53, 89, 96, 99, 100, 104, 254, 273, 279, 282, 285, 332, 385, 388, 416, 418, 495, 512, 513, 695, 820, 985, 1002.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louis XIV., 567</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louis, St., of France, 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Love, William D., 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lovelace, Richard, 507</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lowde, &mdash;&mdash;, 800</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lowell, James R., 13, 151, 407, 426, 500, 503, 633.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lowndes, R., 52, 67, 97, 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lowrie, Walter, 159, 261, 310, 719</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loyola, Ignatius, 33, 904</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lubbock, John, 527</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucan, 700</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucian, 194, 941</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luckock, H. M., 659, 775, 1000, 1002, 1043.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucretius, 91, 255, 299, 380</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lünemann, G., 377, 485</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luthardt, C. E., 2, 14, 22, 30, 44, 46, 51, 68, 84, 112, 222, 245, 249, 341, 404, 408, 530, 559, 575, 668, 723, 754, 816, 829, 836, 929, 982, 991, 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luther, Martin, 45, 156, 205, 209, 226, 237, 240, 251, 329, 344, 364, 409, 437, 441, 458, 487, 494, 556, 562, 569, 650, 654, 692, 747, 776, 808, 823, 830, 840, 891, 902, 903, 912, 942, 954, 969, 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lutheran Quarterly, 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyall, William, 508</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyell, Charles, 65, 374, 532</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lynch, Archbishop, 967</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lysias, Claudius, 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyttelton, Arthur, 647, 722</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lytton, Edward Bulwer, 645</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>M., C. H., see <ref target='Index-MacIntosh'>MacIntosh, C. H.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macan, R. W., 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macaulay, T. B., 40, 47, 406, 659, 872, 898, 913.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McCabe, L. D., 285, 357, 358, 359</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McCane, John Y., 577</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McCheyne, Robert Murray, 1056</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McClintock and Strong, 51, 603, 644</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McConnell, S. D., 851</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McCosh, James, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 43, 54, 67, 70, 73, 77, 78, 87, 93, 94, 95, 102, 339, 403, 427, 437, 839, 1022.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MacDonald, A., 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MacDonald, G., 491, 569</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macdonnell, J. C., 754</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McDuff, J. R., 808</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McGarvey, J. W., 534, 955</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McGiffert, A. C., 44, 888, 902</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MacGregor, James, 894</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McIlvaine, C. P., 146, 150, 191</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McIlvaine, J. H., 193, 231, 394, 474, 583, 644, 744, 750.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-MacIntosh'/>
<l>MacIntosh, C. H., 234, 410, 454, 548, 583, 584, 727, 773, 796, 797, 856, 862, 864, 870, 896, 941.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McKim, W. D., 656</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mackintock, Hugh R., 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McLane, W. W., 985</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McLeod, Norman, 459</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MacLaren, Alexander, 29, 114, 139, 177, 259, 319, 456, 458, 524, 544, 581, 726, 731, 733, 781, 806, 837, 1026.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maclaren, Ian, see <ref target='Index-Watson'>Watson, John</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macmillan, Hugh, 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McPherson, John, 912</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MacWhorter, A., 668</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magee, William, 754</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahaffy, J. P., 18</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahan, Asa, 877</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maimonides, Moses, 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maine, Henry Sumner, 535</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mair, Alexander, 129, 154, 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maistre, Joseph de, 576</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maitland, S. R., 1009</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malebranche, Nicolas de, 100, 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malm, K. E., 844</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mani, 382</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manly, Basil, 198, 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mann, Horace, 810, 1051</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manning, H. E., 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manning, J. M., 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mansel, Henry L., 7, 8, 9, 52, 54, 58, 70, 121, 253, 254, 278, 379, 384, 385, 469, 504, 546, 985.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manton, Thomas, 48, 458</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marchi, Joseph de, 191</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcion, 147, 383, 385</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marck, Johann, 614</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcus Aurelius, 185, 989</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Margoliouth, Moses, 450</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marheinecke, P. C., 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marlowe, Christopher, 449, 560, 1042</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marsh, W. H. H., 128</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1129'/><anchor id='Pg1129'/>

<lg>
<l>Martensen, H. L., 34, 49, 50, 245, 266, 274, 285, 289, 349, 380, 381, 386, 392, 445, 460, 474, 491, 556, 576, 593, 601, 622, 647, 668, 694, 712, 790, 813, 1002, 1003, 1029.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martin, Hugh, 739</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martin, W. A. P., 531</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martineau, Harriet, 990</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martineau, James, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 21, 26, 37, 51, 53, 57, 59, 64, 66, 68, 72, 73, 76, 78, 81, 83, 85, 92, 94, 95, 97, 98, 99, 100, 102, 105, 107, 112, 114, 125, 141, 152, 159, 202, 230, 231, 245, 250, 279, 285, 293, 296, 298, 299, 301, 303, 347, 348, 359, 362, 365, 386, 399, 402, 403, 412, 413, 417, 426, 430, 437, 469, 485, 504, 512, 532, 534, 535, 536, 538, 542, 567, 571, 573, 647, 655, 658, 682, 729, 794, 800, 815, 817, 893, 979, 985, 986, 988, 1003, 1036, 1041, 1047, 1048, 1049.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marvell, Andrew, 990</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mason, J. M., 776</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mason, Otis T., 417, 529</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mason, S. R., 48, 259, 277, 316, 328, 337, 338, 348, 403, 406, 445, 446, 450, 451, 476, 492, 509, 588, 670, 672, 677, 679, 685, 688, 696, 704, 707, 717, 734, 743, 785, 789, 818, 883.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maspero, G., 377, 995</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masson, David, 385, 447</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mather, Cotton, 899</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mather, Increase, 953, 958</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matheson, George, 8, 12, 23, 118, 180, 183, 185, 298, 338, 339, 382, 436, 452, 543, 584, 682, 752, 793, 1003.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matteson, W. B., 958</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maudsley, Henry, 416, 511, 554</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maupas, E., 494, 591</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maurice, F. D., 11, 410, 446, 594, 728, 734, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maxwell, James Clerk, 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mazzini, Giuseppe, 890</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mead, C. M., 11, 14, 120, 263, 279, 475, 681, 952.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meehan, Thomas, 480</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melanchthon, Philip, 45, 344, 414, 441, 558, 562, 613, 699, 761, 789, 816, 830, 864, 875, 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melito, 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mell, P. H., 927</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melvill, Henry, 911</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menken, Gottfried, 744</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menzies, Allan, 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mercersburgh Review, 957</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meredith, &mdash;&mdash;, 978</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Methodist Quarterly Review, 58, 75, 477, 911, 1003.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meyer, F. B., 32</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meyer, H. A. W., 15, 51, 68, 138, 199, 210, 242, 306, 309, 335, 337, 340, 452, 456, 457, 474, 485, 487, 517, 562, 579, 633, 657, 658, 661, 706, 707, 717, 719, 720, 752, 760, 761, 782, 838, 853, 902, 906, 907, 910, 915, 934, 935, 948, 951, 960, 973, 994, 1010, 1039, 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meze, S. E., 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael Angelo, 986, 1055</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michaelis, J. D., 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miley, J., 818</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mill, James, 114, 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mill, J. S., 11, 78, 80, 83, 85, 96, 127, 130, 131, 179, 188, 190, 299, 378, 379, 381, 402, 506, 532, 533, 814, 904, 979, 986.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miller, Edward, 744</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miller, G. C., 257, 270</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miller, Hugh, 394</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miller, John, 30, 53, 397, 708, 759</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Millet, J. F., 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milligan, William, 131, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mills, B. Fay, 855</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mills, L. H., 383</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milton, John, 37, 237, 284, 286, 292, 329, 360, 385, 409, 443, 453, 494, 523, 560, 572, 583, 587, 589, 620, 647, 742, 749, 783, 789, 873, 1032, 1034.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mind, 468, 509</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minton, H. C., 6, 26, 348</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mishna, 931</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mitchell, Arthur, 529</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mitchell, E. C., 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mitchell, J. M., 182, 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mitchell, Seth K., 810</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mivart, St. George, 9, 78, 97, 104, 283, 380, 468, 470, 472, 474, 528.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moberly, R. C., 253, 260, 288, 291, 323, 328, 331, 333, 343, 345, 594, 654, 674, 684, 691, 737, 756, 769, 836.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moehler, J. A., 47, 207, 518, 522, 853, 866, 911.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moffat, Robert, 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molina, Luis, 358</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moltke, Count H. von, 401</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Momerie, A. W., 700</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monod, Adolphe, 41, 541, 751</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monrad, D. G., 437</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montesquieu, S., 535</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moody, D. L., 188, 313, 506</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moore, A. L., 416</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moore, Aubrey, 492</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moore, E. M., 481</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moorhouse, James, 679, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>More, Sir Thomas, 654, 1031</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morell, J. D., 4, 12, 20, 33, 88, 93, 202, 510.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morgan, L. H., 527, 530</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morison, James, 148, 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mormon, Book of, 141</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morris, E. D., 45, 708, 1044</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morris, George S., 43, 253, 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morris, H. W., 483</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morrison, C. R., 131</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morton, S. G., 480</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mosheim, J. L. von, 376</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moule, H. C. G., 48, 340, 485, 790, 913</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moulton, Richard G., 651</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moxom, P. S., 273, 302, 349, 495, 637, 750, 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mozart, W. A., 276</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1130'/><anchor id='Pg1130'/>

<lg>
<l>Mozley, J. B., 3, 75, 100, 117, 118, 124, 126, 129, 130, 132, 231, 432, 546, 570, 620, 622, 631, 766, 790, 841, 994, 997, 1041.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mozoomdar, 678</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Müller, G. C, 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Müller, George, 438, 439</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Müller, Gustav A., 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Müller, Julius, 10, 21, 22, 31, 46, 51, 53, 74, 82, 105, 245, 257, 263, 278, 285, 341, 388, 418, 488, 489, 490, 507, 519, 544, 552, 557, 559, 562, 563, 566, 567, 569, 571, 577, 579, 582, 585, 600, 605, 606, 611, 612, 616, 618, 621, 634, 643, 644, 647, 651, 654, 657, 660, 661, 676, 677, 706, 775, 777, 847, 983, 1003.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Müller, F. Max, 20, 56, 101, 193, 225, 260, 309, 335, 469, 478, 479, 531, 668, 844.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muir, William, 157, 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mulford, Elisha, 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mullins, E. Y., 717, 738, 754, 755</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murphy, J. G., 445</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murphy, J. J., 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 16, 71, 73, 76, 79, 80, 82, 99, 103, 121, 129, 276, 401, 412, 512, 538, 544, 548, 576, 606, 622, 786, 824, 846, 955, 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murray, Andrew, 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murray, J. C., 98</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murray, T. C., 172, 479</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murray, W. H. H., 447</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myers, F. W. H., 69, 120, 134, 206, 457, 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myers, Frederic, 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nägeli, C. von, 987</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nägelsbach, C. F., 723</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nägelsbach, K. W. E., 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nansen, F., 431</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Napoleon, 143, 349, 421, 512, 561, 682</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nash, H. S., 150, 157, 691, 763, 841</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nation, The, 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nature, 471</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naville, Ernest, 508, 622, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neander, J. A. W., 40, 41, 305, 335, 384, 487, 563, 587, 600, 621, 661, 670, 749, 852, 870, 878, 896, 897, 902, 907, 936, 951, 952, 953, 954, 1003, 1014, 1023, 1029.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nelson, Horatio, 577</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nelson, John, 1026</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nestorius, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nevin, J. W., 969</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nevius, J. L., 445, 453, 456, 457, 461</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Englander, 5, 6, 8, 38, 62, 74, 94, 98, 181, 185, 207, 278, 314, 413, 532, 616, 666, 923, 952, 1014, 1038.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New World, 507</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newman, A. H., 44, 379, 382, 385, 937, 953.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newman, F. W., 12, 37, 202, 585, 988, 1055</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newman, J. H., 5, 17, 33, 37, 114, 202, 208, 222, 451, 584, 586, 853, 866.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newton, Sir Isaac, 60, 139, 311, 1009</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newton, John, 576</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newton, Thomas, 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicoll, W. R., 130, 155, 161, 313, 659, 708, 746, 1016.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niese, B., 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nippold, Friedrich, 740</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nitzsch, Carl I., 14, 20, 22, 31, 41, 46, 53, 59, 72, 269, 485, 519, 559, 583, 652, 849.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noel, Baptist W., 938, 972</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noetus, 327</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nordau, Max S., 40</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nordell, P. A., 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>North British Review, 363, 952</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northrup, G. W., 255, 293, 474, 614, 640, 662, 772, 789.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norton, Andrews, 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norton, C. E., 138</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norton, John, 539</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nott, J. C., and G. R. Gliddon, 480</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Novalis, 43, 526</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Novatian, 937</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noyes, G. R., 548</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Occam, William of, 45, 244, 298, 299, 909.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Œdipus, 469</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oehler, G. F., 137, 375, 376, 585, 725</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oetinger, F. C., 216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oldenberg, Hermann, 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oliphant, Mrs. M. O. W., 744</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olshausen, Hermann, 945</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omar Kháyyám, 407, 511, 542, 990</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oosterzee, J. J. Van, see <ref target='Index-Van-Oosterzee'>Van Oosterzee, J. J.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origen, 15, 44, 53, 146, 153, 328, 386, 409, 451, 488, 489, 734, 1019, 1041.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orr, James, 6, 30, 141, 172, 298</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osgood, Howard, 18, 172, 226, 995, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ossory, Bishop of, 836, 849, 853, 868</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Outlook, The, 305, 350, 650, 718, 744</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ovid, 416, 523, 575, 723</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Owen, John, 47, 295, 297, 326, 340, 343, 613, 663, 697, 754, 770, 773, 802, 820, 826, 868, 876, 886.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Owen, Richard, 77, 98, 389, 396, 480</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Owen, Robert Dale, 506</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paine, L. L., 44, 148, 262, 305, 308, 328, 500, 718.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paine, Thomas, 112, 564</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pajon, Claude, 947</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paley, William, 174, 299, 409, 534</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palmer, Frederic, 203, 342, 659, 701</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palmer, G. H., 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palmer, T. R., 955</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papias, 148, 149, 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Park, E. A., 197, 231, 271, 278, 290, 301, 304, 342, 354, 367, 401, 605, 608, 609, 637, 675, 727, 740, 743, 827, 911, 913, 928.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parker, Edwin P., 711</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parker, Joel, 1052</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parker, Joseph, 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parker, Theodore, 12, 120, 186, 202, 446, 501, 958, 989, 1050, 1055.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parkhurst, Charles H., 22, 242, 486, 584</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1131'/><anchor id='Pg1131'/>

<lg>
<l>Pascal, Blaise, 4, 21, 38, 40, 47, 62, 120, 129, 205, 403, 469, 516, 581, 635, 691, 808, 821, 841, 909.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paton, John G., 32, 76, 195, 423</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pattison, S. R., 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pattison, T. H., 24, 42, 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patton, F. L., 63, 70, 79, 172, 212, 297, 300, 368, 655, 841, 889, 1047.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patton, W. W., 437, 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paulsen, Friedrich, 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Payne, B. H., 651</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Payne, George, 617, 790, 820</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peabody, A. P., 22, 29, 51, 60, 89, 112, 146, 157, 230, 503, 672.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peabody, Ephraim, 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pearson, John, 48, 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pearson, Thomas, 415</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peck, A. C., 790</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peck, George, 877</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peirce, Benjamin, 396</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelagius, 491, 597</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pengilly, R., 938</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penn, William, 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pentecost, G. F., 767, 813</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pepper, G. D. B., 102, 124, 286, 353, 357, 425, 537, 629, 933, 955, 980, 1014.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perowne, J. J. S., 172, 231, 403, 412, 451, 812, 833.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perrone, J., 47, 523</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persius, 380, 647</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peschel, O., 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petavius, Dionysius, 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter Lombard, 44, 613, 704, 747</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter Martyr, 46, 524</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peters, &mdash;&mdash;, 507</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peyrerius, 476</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pezzi, D., 479</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pfleiderer, Otto, 5, 8, 10, 12, 21, 54, 59, 60, 61, 63, 74, 87, 104, 111, 116, 120, 122, 134, 156, 158, 164, 182, 216, 237, 269, 328, 332, 365, 383, 386, 388, 406, 447, 466, 490, 492, 519, 530, 559, 571, 585, 586, 603, 608, 681, 700, 717, 718, 719, 721, 728, 750, 799, 839, 938, 951, 954.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phelps, Austin, 437, 496, 820, 1034</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippi, F. A., 4, 20, 46, 51, 222, 257, 273, 287, 378, 418, 420, 442, 444, 462, 463, 491, 514, 516, 519, 520, 523, 539, 549, 563, 566, 571, 579, 585, 592, 606, 612, 622, 671, 673, 688, 690, 696, 697, 706, 708, 709, 710, 713, 721, 733, 750, 754, 766, 771, 776, 836, 859.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phillips, Wendell, 907</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philo, 126, 166, 203, 244, 320, 321, 335, 340, 377, 488, 489, 722, 995.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pickering, Charles, 477, 480</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pictet, Benedict, 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pierce, Nehemiah, 823</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pierret, Paul, 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pillsbury, Parker, 982</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pinches, T. G., 531</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Placeus, Joshua, 46, 616, 617</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato, 16, 25, 29, 33, 67, 68, 111, 112, 143, 183, 203, 261, 262, 302, 310, 335, 364, 461, 488, 489, 516, 526, 560, 581, 647, 660, 700, 764, 989, 1031.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny, 191, 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plummer, A., 932</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plumptre, E. H., 153, 158, 700, 708, 821, 909, 915, 935, 993.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutarch, 113, 429, 537, 575, 788, 813, 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polanus, A., 491</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pollok, Robert, 1019</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polycarp, 147, 149, 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomeroy, John, 536</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pond, Enoch, 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pope, Alexander, 77, 102, 404, 430, 1020</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pope, W. B., 48, 68, 394, 562, 578, 583, 602, 706, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porter, Frank C., 152, 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porter, Noah, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 20, 43, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 60, 63, 66, 67, 73, 75, 78, 82, 86, 93, 96, 100, 125, 179, 253, 254, 257, 275, 278, 279, 280, 412, 417, 469, 486, 508, 516, 524, 695, 815, 1019, 1021.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poteat, E. M., 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pott, A. F., 478</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potwin, Lemuel S., 735</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Powell, Baden, 434, 548</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Praxeas, 327</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer Book, English, 46, 937, 957, 978</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prentiss, George L., 664</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Presbyterian and Reformed Review, 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Presbyterian Quarterly Review, 5, 96, 132, 133, 182, 477, 614, 913, 915, 924, 960, 998, 1005, 1013, 1014.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Present Day Tracts,</q>, 162, 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pressensé, E. D. de, 130, 162, 187, 321, 666.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prestwich, Joseph, 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preyer, W. T., 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Price, Richard, 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prichard, J. C., 480, 483</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priestley, Joseph, 198, 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prime, Samuel Irenæus, 437</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Princeton Essays, 304, 330, 343, 359, 401, 555, 598, 600, 601, 611, 612, 613, 619, 644, 707, 733, 744, 881.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Princeton Review, 5, 11, 78, 216, 469, 481, 622, 640, 708, 747, 896, 911, 977, 1014, 1037, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proudhon, &mdash;&mdash;, 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptah hotep, 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pusey, E. B., 429, 518, 834, 969</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pym, John, 419</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pythagoras, 112, 183, 190, 386</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quarles, Francis, 752</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quatrefages, A. de, 474, 477, 480</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quenstedt, J. A., 45, 208, 244, 269, 444, 669, 795, 859, 864.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Racovian Catechism, 47, 524</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rainy, Robert, 12, 177, 221, 912</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramabai, Pundita, 161, 905</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ranke, Leopold von, 369</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1132'/><anchor id='Pg1132'/>

<lg>
<l>Ratzel, Friedrich, 530</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rauschenbusch, Augustus, 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rauschenbusch, Walter, 540, 909, 982</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rawlinson, George, 56, 191, 225, 229, 351, 482, 483, 529, 531, 532.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raymond, Miner, 48, 53, 358, 362, 519, 602, 605, 606, 611, 621, 644.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reade, Winwood, 405</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Records of the Past, 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Redford, R. A., 141</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reid, Thomas, 276, 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reid, William, 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reinhard, F. V., 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renan, Ernest, 57, 115, 131, 160, 161, 162, 174, 188, 666.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renouf, P. Le Page, 57, 58, 103, 351, 377, 397, 479, 482, 799, 995, 1022, 1024.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renouvier, C. B., 512</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reubelt, John A., 686</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reusch, F. H., 897</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reuss, E., 41, 147, 579, 670</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Réville, Jean, 177, 821</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revillout, Eugène, 226, 995</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revue Théologique, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reynolds, Edward, 622</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhees, Rush, 144, 190, 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ribot, Th., 497, 505, 625, 813</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rice, W. N., 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richards, James, 555, 644, 773, 777</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richardson, J. H., 525</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richelieu, 1048</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richter, Jean Paul, 105, 204, 467, 553, 641</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Riddle, M. B., 152, 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rider, C. E., 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Riggenbach, C. J., 485</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ridgeley, Thomas, 47, 48, 664, 696, 790, 886</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ripley, Henry J., 929</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritchie, D. G., 12, 16, 60, 572, 615</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritschl, Albrecht, 5, 6, 11, 14, 21, 41, 46, 120, 245, 264, 291, 579, 622, 732, 734, 737, 799, 866, 877, 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritter, Heinrich, 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robbins, R. D. C., 1041</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roberts, B. T., 918</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roberts, W. Page-, 496</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robertson, F. W., 39, 205, 253, 344, 346, 378, 379, 469, 548, 567, 570, 654, 656, 679, 682, 695, 734, 855, 860, 948, 1028, 1049.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robertson, J. D., 814</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robertson, James, 121, 143, 169, 668, 724.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robie, Edward, 351</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robin, C. P., 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robins, H. E., 647, 649, 663, 674, 697, 706, 803, 946.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robinson, C. S., 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robinson, Edward, 227, 892, 906, 918, 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robinson, Ezekiel G., 3, 16, 18, 26, 31, 34, 39, 40, 42, 51, 68, 119, 129, 130, 156, 157, 162, 177, 205, 228, 231, 244, 268, 270, 273, 278, 287, 297, 299, 301, 302, 304, 314, 316, 319, 322,
326, 334, 342, 356, 357, 360, 367, 383, 398, 429, 432, 434, 436, 444, 458, 498, 499, 504, 512, 519, 536, 539, 540, 544, 550, 572, 586, 589, 594, 615, 638, 644, 662, 666, 667, 701, 709, 723, 729, 730, 736, 740, 747, 750, 776, 818, 822, 824, 828, 842, 853, 854, 890, 912, 917, 942, 954, 955, 969, 983, 1016, 1023, 1048, 1049, 1051.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robinson, John, 35, 222</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robinson, Willard H., 1038</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rogers, Henry, 12, 115, 116, 156, 189, 204, 232, 282, 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rogers, J. G., 969</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romaine, W., 437, 849</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romanes, G. J., 22, 69, 94, 250, 346, 466, 469, 470, 478, 510, 631, 676.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roscelin, Jean, 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ross, A. H., 929</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rossetti, Dante Gabriel, 489</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rossetti, Maria F., 443</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rothe, Richard, 50, 216, 244, 249, 285, 287, 416, 493, 559, 689, 740, 893.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rousseau, J. J., 562, 576, 577</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Row, C. A., 51, 121, 131, 152, 157, 160, 179, 187, 204, 233, 433.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rowland, H. A., 60</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rowlands, H. O., 926</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rowley, F. H., 476</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Royce, Josiah, 16, 32, 54, 55, 56, 60, 69, 99, 110, 124, 261, 267, 276, 277, 283, 284, 286, 349, 357, 380, 405, 407, 442, 511, 558, 594, 615, 758, 785, 987, 1025.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rückert, L. J., 517, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ruskin, John, 59, 415, 443, 482, 648, 825</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russell, John, 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ryle, H. E., 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saarschmidt, see <ref target='Index-Schaarschmidt'>Schaarschmidt, Karl</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabatier, L. A., 21, 128, 137, 155, 205, 666, 697, 892.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabellius, 327</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sadler, M. F., 948, 969</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sagebeer, J. E., 141, 153, 653, 852</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sainte-Beuve, C. A., 561</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saintine, X. B., 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saisset, Emil, 86, 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saker, Alfred, 843</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sakya-Mouni, 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sale, George, 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salisbury, Lord, 834</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salmon, George, 154, 160, 549</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salmond, S. D. F., 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salter, W. M., 300, 538, 541</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samson, G. W., 464, 917, 934, 960</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanday, William, 146, 152, 164, 165, 198, 203, 209, 228, 236, 307, 933, 945.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanders, F. W., 427</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanderson, J. S. Burdon-, 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Santayana, George, 269, 510</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sartorius, Ernest, 693, 695, 705</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturninus, 383</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savage, Eleazer, 926</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savage, M. J., 69, 432, 447, 985, 989, 992, 1017.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savage, W. R., 1003</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1133'/><anchor id='Pg1133'/>

<lg>
<l>Savonarola, Girolamo, 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sayce, A. H., 57, 376, 408, 478, 479</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Schaarschmidt'/>
<l>Schaarschmidt, Karl, 512</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schäfer, Bernhard, 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schäffer, C. F., 329</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schaff, Philip, 44, 46, 50, 131, 189, 341, 598, 599, 622, 637, 652, 668, 670, 678, 682, 696, 902, 936, 937, 971, 1003.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schelling, F. W. J. von, 101, 252, 386</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schenkel, Daniel, 503</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scherer, E., 460</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schiller, Friedrich, 74, 303, 386, 633, 644, 981.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schleiermacher, F. E. D., 14, 20, 34, 42, 46, 244, 287, 314, 327, 461, 486, 503, 519, 559, 563, 734, 740, 783, 951, 981.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schliemann, H., 529</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmid, C. F., 41, 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmid, H., 699</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmid, Rudolph, 397, 479, 482</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schneckenburger, M., 931</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schodde, George H., 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schöberlein, D. L., 697, 754, 808</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scholz, Paul, 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schopenhauer, A., 54, 78, 101, 105, 404</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schrader, Eberhard, 408</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schürer, Emil, 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schurman, J. G., 8, 9, 19, 25, 55, 63, 67, 94, 99, 129, 130, 254, 268, 332, 398, 439, 466, 470, 615, 894, 908, 910, 1050.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schwegler, A., 345, 504</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schweizer, A., 42, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schwenkfeld, Caspar, 800</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scott, C. Anderson, 913, 915</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scott, C. S., 928</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scott, Thomas, 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scott, Pres. Walter, 444</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scott, Sir Walter, 177, 350, 489</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotus Erigena, John, 44, 244, 524</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotus, Novanticus, 511</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scribner, G. H., 478</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sears, E. H., 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Secrétan, Charles, 74, 621, 666</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seeley, J. R., 295, 576, 819</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seelye, J. H., 528, 1013</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semler, J. S., 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seneca, M. Annæus, 83, 112, 177, 185, 398, 404, 516, 575, 814, 868, 989.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sennacherib, 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Septuagint, 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serapion, 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servetus, Michel, 778</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seth, James, 61, 64, 97, 101, 104, 105, 416, 418, 503, 505, 512, 536, 655, 678, 800, 986, 1042.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sewall, C. G., 1042</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shaftesbury, Lord, 984</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shairp, J. C., 70, 982</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shakespeare, William, 17, 19, 23, 120, 170, 288, 289, 369, 426, 439, 442, 450, 452, 463, 472, 492, 502, 506, 511, 516, 526, 562, 569, 572, 575, 581, 633, 638, 645, 647, 651, 703,
732, 751, 767, 814, 815, 833, 835, 841, 939, 948, 984, 988, 990, 1042, 1051, 1055.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shaler, N. S., 112, 119, 194, 225, 432, 435, 468, 492, 529, 632.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shammai, 931</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shaw, Benjamin, 78</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shedd, W. G. T., 5, 10, 16, 21, 26, 41, 49, 51, 56, 57, 58, 69, 87, 95, 101, 105, 118, 119, 125, 243, 246, 253, 255, 261, 262, 268, 273, 277, 278, 290, 294, 296, 297, 298, 305, 314, 315, 328, 332, 333, 334, 338, 341, 343, 345, 348, 356, 367, 368, 373, 376, 380, 384, 400, 408, 472, 474, 481, 494, 504, 517, 518, 522, 523, 528, 537, 555, 557, 562, 564, 576, 578, 582, 585, 586, 588, 592, 601, 602, 607, 619, 621, 622, 625, 627, 630, 631, 635, 637, 640, 643, 645, 647, 655, 671, 678, 679, 683, 696, 700, 704, 709, 713, 719, 733, 737, 744, 749, 750, 754, 762, 768, 767, 770, 773, 780, 786, 816, 820, 822, 823, 827, 833, 847, 853, 880, 914, 957, 1041, 1043, 1044, 1046, 1048, 1049, 1051, 1052, 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheldon, D. N., 598, 729</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheldon, H. C., 384, 603, 625</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shelley, P. B., 57, 526, 757</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shipley, Orby, 572</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Short, Augustus, 845</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sibbes, Richard, 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sidgwick, Henry, 64, 510</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siegfried, C., 321</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silvernail, J. P., 674</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simon, D. W., 16, 110, 266, 285, 293, 295, 346, 475, 541, 560, 625, 649, 671, 681, 719, 730, 750, 754, 763, 769, 822, 833, 1051.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Small, A. W., 106</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smalley, John, 49, 608</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smeaton, George, 726</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, Adam, 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, C. E., 340, 872, 935, 951</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, Edwin B., 898</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, George, 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, George Adam, 122, 145, 203, 266, 422, 582, 724, 923, 997.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, Goldwin, 303, 422, 429</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, H. B., 2, 3, 11, 42, 46, 49, 50, 55, 62, 66, 87, 101, 117, 130, 157, 162, 251, 273, 303, 350, 447, 503, 504, 513, 538, 546, 556, 570, 578, 579, 581, 583, 587, 595, 604, 607, 609, 612, 617, 621, 631, 634, 639, 656, 677, 691, 787, 790, 792, 794, 795, 811, 823, 843, 858, 862, 864</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, H. P., 116, 172, 209, 228, 238, 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, J. A., 368</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, J. Denham, 808</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, J. Pye, 319, 394</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, Lucius E., 843</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, Philip, 532</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, R. B., 427</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, R. Payne, 135, 172, 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, R. T., 98, 113, 502, 503, 509, 642</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, T. T., 841</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, Thornley, 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, W. Robertson, 134, 171, 221, 275, 318.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1134'/><anchor id='Pg1134'/>

<lg>
<l>Smith, William, 118, 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smyth, Newman, 13, 30, 37, 62, 63, 65, 122, 265, 271, 289, 291, 296, 302, 304, 335, 402, 448, 591, 657, 784, 987, 1019, 1022, 1039, 1046</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smyth, Thomas, 477, 479, 480, 483</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snodgrass, W. D., 881</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Society of Biblical Archæology, 408</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socinus, Faustus, 47, 284, 329, 729</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socinus, Laelius, 47, 729</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socrates, 111, 112, 143, 177, 183, 505, 653, 989.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Solar Hieroglyphics,</q>, 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solly, Thomas, 276, 545</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solon, 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sophocles, 57, 141, 144, 469, 540</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sophocles, E. A., 933</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, Robert, 128, 524, 705</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southall, James C., 529</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southampton, Bishop of, 119, 130, 432</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southey, Robert, 32, 996</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spear, Samuel T., 736</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spectator, London, 170, 399</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spencer, Herbert, 7, 8, 9, 10, 22, 29, 43, 57, 63, 73, 74, 94, 96, 98, 187, 223, 245, 251, 294, 301, 331, 416, 426, 438, 508, 528, 532, 566, 722, 904.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spencer, John, 722</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spencer, Otto, 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spenser, Edmund, 257, 463</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spilsbury, J., 903, 949</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spinoza, Benedict de, 9, 30, 43, 55, 86, 94, 103, 244, 287, 415, 559, 563, 682, 834.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Splittgerber, F., 998, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spurgeon, Charles H., 17, 27, 28, 247, 364, 369, 458, 589, 752, 813, 918, 920, 975, 976.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Squier, Miles P., 820, 823</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stählin, Leonhard, 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Staël, Madame de, 23</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stahl, F. J., 636, 723</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stalker, James, 691</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stallo, J. B., 91, 397</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanley, A. P., 35, 193, 227, 230, 239, 242, 427, 691, 888, 910, 936, 940, 946, 957, 966</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanley, Henry M., 427, 430</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanley, Hiram M., 278</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stapfer, J. F., 20, 619</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Starbuck, E. D., 812</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Starkie, Thomas, 128, 141, 144, 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Statement of Doctrine of Presbyterian Church in America, A Short, 790</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Staupitz, Johann, 556</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stead, Herbert, 889</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stearns, L. F., 5, 28, 33, 68, 125, 130, 140, 635, 637, 771.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steffens, H., 1002</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephen, J. F., 656</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephen, Leslie, 114, 596</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sterrett, J. M., 20, 21, 23, 101, 407, 624</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steudel, J. C. F., 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stevens, G. B., 31, 270, 296, 525, 579, 609, 623, 738, 848, 974, 982, 1016.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stevens, W. A., 138, 149, 157, 294, 485, 569, 572, 623, 836, 853, 936, 993, 1005, 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stevenson, R. L., 643</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stewart, Dugald, 285, 427, 571</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stewart, J. W. A., 21, 261, 339, 795, 839, 997.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stirling, J. H., 100, 176, 389</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stirling, John, 40</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stone, G. M., 940</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Storr, G. C., 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Storrs, Emory, 1055</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Storrs, R. S., 19, 889</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Story, W. W., 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stourdza, A. de, 937</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stout, G. F., 43, 295, 1003</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stowe, Calvin E., 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Straffen, G. M., 560</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strauss, D. F., 46, 57, 131, 135, 155, 156, 349, 405, 407, 460, 523, 547, 708, 990.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stoops, J. D., 571</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strong, Augustus H., 3, 5, 10, 25, 29, 35, 38, 39, 40, 45, 46, 53, 95, 97, 106, 110, 117, 118, 123, 138, 140, 163, 164, 176, 193, 220, 221, 252, 259, 262, 264, 268, 275, 277, 287, 294, 297, 311, 340, 350, 356, 358, 362, 389, 440, 501, 504, 520, 560, 569, 572, 596, 634, 644, 646, 651, 674, 681, 683, 692, 693, 716, 762, 763, 768, 785, 799, 802, 804, 808, 812, 848, 899, 908, 914, 918, 924, 926, 942, 943, 977, 980, 1001, 1006, 1009, 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strong, Charles A., 97, 98, 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strong, John H., 472</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stroud, William, 675, 731</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stuart, Moses, 327, 328, 602, 615, 931, 933, 937, 956, 1003, 1009.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Studien und Kritiken, 75, 747, 792</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sully, James, 488</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumner, Charles, 409</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumner, J. B., 783</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunday School Times, 122, 292, 301, 468, 498, 502, 523, 549, 574, 589, 650, 782, 852, 1018.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Supernatural Religion,</q> 130, 151, 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swayne, W. S., 315, 699</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swedenborg, Emmanuel, 32, 207, 251, 383, 386, 1041.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swift, Jonathan, 405</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Symington, William, 761, 773, 775</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tacitus, 191, 192, 442, 487, 569, 989</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taine, H. A., 581</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talbot, Samson, 39, 94, 98, 301, 302, 508, 694.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talleyrand, Prince de, 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talmage, T. DeW., 464</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talmud, 282, 902</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tatian, 151, 383</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, Bayard, 525</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, D. T., 1015</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, Father Edward T., 453</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, Herbert, 403</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, Isaac, 382, 422, 440, 526</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, Jeremy, 352, 651</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1135'/><anchor id='Pg1135'/>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, John, 416, 602</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, John M., 396</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, N. W., 39, 48, 126, 295, 299, 351, 367, 420, 535, 567, 579, 607, 608, 783, 817, 853.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, W. M., 852</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, W. R., 889</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Teaching of the Twelve, The,</q>, 159, 311, 410, 892, 906, 937, 938.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temple, Frederick, 11, 59, 77, 115, 118, 474</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ten Broeke, James, 45, 184, 414</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tennyson, Alfred, 3, 8, 37, 57, 62, 65, 245, 252, 253, 256, 259, 276, 280, 284, 294, 301, 383, 400, 413, 424, 443, 444, 467, 489, 509, 515, 520, 525, 528, 571, 577, 581, 633, 653, 659, 679, 711, 772, 799, 804, 806, 982, 986, 991, 1039, 1051.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Terence, 698</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tertullian, 34, 146, 150, 152, 159, 191, 493, 599, 619, 620, 665, 783, 894, 936, 937, 953, 998, 1001.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teulon, J. S., 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thackeray, W. M., 151, 575</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thatcher, O. J., 929</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thayer, J. H., 150, 152, 205, 228, 306, 717, 933.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Theodosia Ernest,</q>, 980</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodoret, 319, 796</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theological Eclectic, 160, 739</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophilus, 147, 319, 998</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thirlwall, Connop, 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tholuck, F. A. G., 33, 46, 56, 68, 132, 205, 260, 275, 307, 379, 440, 485, 576, 578, 666.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas à Kempis, 24, 32, 190, 556</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas, B. D., 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas, J. B., 653</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomasius, G., 46, 50, 51, 245, 249, 257, 261, 263, 270, 273, 274, 288, 297, 315, 328, 338, 342, 349, 487, 514, 527, 556, 579, 622, 647, 668, 678, 683, 690, 701, 750, 761, 808, 868.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thompson, Chief Justice (Pennsylvania), 581</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thompson, Joseph D., 340, 651</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thompson, R. A., 81, 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thompson, R. E., 237, 473</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomson, J. Radford, 405</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomson, Archbishop William, 66, 744</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomson, William, 771</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomson, William, Lord Kelvin, 36, 473</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thoreau, H. D., 982</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thornton, W. S., 128, 439, 654</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thornwell, James H., 2, 49, 303, 600, 616, 618, 621, 631, 644, 647, 648, 834.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thucydides, 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiele, C. P., 995</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tillotson, John, 808</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tindal, Matthew, 414</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tischendorf, Constantinus, 142, 915</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titchener, E. B., 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titcomb, J. H., 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Todd, J. H., 1009</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Töllner, J. G., 576</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tophel, G., 571</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toplady, A. M., 369</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Townsend, W. J., 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toy, C. H., 235, 931</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tract No. 357, American Tract Society, 840</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tracy, Frederick, 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Treffrey, R., 343</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tregelles, S. P., 147, 915</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trench, R. C., 24, 120, 294, 432, 436, 447, 456, 462, 588, 680, 808, 892, 936, 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trendelenburg, F. A., 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trent, Canons and Decrees of the Council of, 521, 854</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trumbull, H. Clay, 723</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tulloch, John, 6, 53, 77, 96, 379, 384, 405, 546, 563.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turnbull, Robert, 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turner, G. L., 126, 1002</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turner, J. M. W., 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turretin, F., 46, 356, 491, 612, 613, 614, 644, 652, 686, 773, 779.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twesten, A. D. C., 22, 28, 31, 46, 328, 338, 348, 350, 444.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyerman, L., 972</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyler, Bennet, 358, 359, 360, 364, 367, 567, 579, 608, 644, 783, 796, 814, 817, 818.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyler, C. M., 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyler, W. S., 155, 276, 352, 442, 526, 679, 723, 796, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tylor, E. B., 58, 477, 480, 528, 529, 530</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyndall, John, 14, 60, 83, 94, 96, 252, 311, 433.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyng, S. H., 744</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ueberweg, Friedrich, 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uhlhorn, Gerhard, 162, 989</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ullmann, K., 4, 189, 203, 678, 747</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ulpian, 535</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ulrici, H., 53, 58, 93, 368</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Unseen Universe, The,</q>, 374, 379, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Upham, L. C., 32, 439, 808</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Upton, C. B., 22, 54, 73, 94, 385, 393, 413, 415, 435, 468, 505, 512, 834, 987.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urban II., 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ursinus, Z., 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ussher, James, 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valentinus, 151, 160, 378, 670</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valerius Maximus, 989</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Van Dyke, Henry, 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vaniçek, Alois, 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Van-Oosterzee'/>
<l>Van Oosterzee, J. J., 5, 20, 22, 23, 42, 51, 66, 72, 311, 460, 462, 514, 523, 555, 556, 581, 593, 608, 651, 668, 696, 706, 709, 710, 773, 776, 790, 875, 886.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vatke, J. K. W., 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vaughan, C. J., 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vaughan, Henry, 276, 489</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vaughan, R. A., 33, 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vauvenargues, 40</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vedas, 56</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1136'/><anchor id='Pg1136'/>

<lg>
<l>Vedder, H. C., 887, 890, 894, 899, 957, 973.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Veitch, John, 97, 380</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venn, J., 849</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vincent, Marvin R., 133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vinci, Leonardo da, 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vinet, Alexander, 38, 125, 267</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virchow, Rudolph, 471</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgil, 57, 176, 400, 526, 615, 698, 723</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vischer, E., 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitringa, Campegius, 1009, 1014</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Volkmar, Gustav, 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Voltaire, 57, 77, 462</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vos, Geerhardus, 263</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waffle, A. E., 407, 410, 754</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wagner, &mdash;&mdash;, 480</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wagner, Richard, 512</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walch, J. G., 954</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waldegrave, L., 1014</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walden, Treadwell, 833</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walker, G. L., 952</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walker, J. B., 151, 317, 668, 820</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walker, W. L., 316, 349</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wall, William, 959, 978</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wallace, A. R., 99, 402, 403, 412, 413, 470, 471, 473, 528, 632.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wallace, Henry, 725</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walton, Isaak, 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ward, James, 110, 124, 534</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ward, Clara E., 263</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ward, Mrs. Humphrey, 568, 580, 633</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ward, Lydia A. Coonley, 596</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ward, Wilfrid, 841</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wardlaw, Ralph, 1, 135, 269, 374, 741, 773, 784, 790, 820.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warfield, B. B., 735, 782</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warner, Charles Dudley, 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warren, H. W., 796</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warren, I. P., 1005, 1009</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warren, W. F., 532</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watchman, The, 425, 907</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waterland, Daniel, 856</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watkins, H. W., 34, 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Watson'/>
<l>Watson, John, 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watson, John (Ian McLaren), 19, 42, 237, 369, 439, 788.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watson, Richard, 48, 343, 350, 358, 404, 593, 602, 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watson, William, 35, 417, 420</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watts, Isaac, 288, 688, 759</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watts, J. F., 508</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watts, Robert, 170, 172, 216, 218, 229, 352, 735, 765, 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wayland, Francis, 301, 504, 533, 892, 897, 903, 905, 917, 924, 929, 938, 946, 951, 952, 956.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Webb, C. C. J., 104, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weber, F. A., 294, 726</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Webster, Daniel, 815, 1056</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Webster, H. E., 262</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Webster, W., 761</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wedgwood, J., 32</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wegscheider, J. A. L., 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weigel, Valentine, 800</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weismann, A., 229, 466, 470, 497, 530, 558, 590, 631, 650, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weiss, Bernhard, 68, 149, 157, 160, 174, 343, 579, 798.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weiss, &mdash;&mdash;, 1015</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weisse, C. H., 660</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wellhausen, Julius, 171, 526</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Welling, J. C., 927</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wellington, Duke of, 506</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wendelius, 827</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wendt, H. H., 223, 262, 321, 379, 446, 448, 475, 517, 546, 661, 721, 729, 743, 799, 830, 936, 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wenley, R. M., 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wessel, John, 752</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wesley, Charles, 33, 368, 692</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wesley, John, 33, 48, 368, 369, 443, 602, 603, 816, 877, 878, 920, 972, 984, 1043.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>West, Nathaniel, 131</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westcott, B. F., 21, 122, 139, 147, 149, 152, 153, 156, 160, 233, 256, 306, 311, 312, 320, 336, 341, 342, 424, 495, 678, 680, 709, 722, 723, 727, 731, 760, 807, 873, 900, 915, 924, 934, 1012, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westermarck, E. A., 530</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westervelt, Z. F., 216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westminster Catechism, 52, 664, 957</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westminster Confession, 145, 599, 613, 643, 779, 790, 887, 937.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weston, Henry G., 930, 959</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wette, De, see <ref target='Index-DeWette'>De Wette, W. M. L.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wetzer und Welte, 572</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wharton, Edith, 905</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wharton, Francis, 656</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whately, Richard, 39, 62, 66, 74, 128,143, 174, 444, 528, 783, 913, 1003, 1015, 1052.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whedon, D. D., 48, 262, 273, 286, 354, 362, 520, 559, 602, 603, 604, 606, 780, 1041.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whewell, William, 2, 74, 77, 500</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitby, Daniel, 602, 1014</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White, Blanco, 37, 570, 1041</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White, Edward, 1037</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitefield, George, 368, 835</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitehouse, Owen C., 461</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitman, Walt, 567</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitney, Adeline D. T., 439</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitney, William D., 185, 217, 479</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whiton, J. M., 119, 208, 297, 305, 334, 336, 342, 343, 348, 413, 516, 542, 633, 680, 684, 699, 743, 772, 850, 1001, 1037, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whittier, John G., 369, 678, 765, 984, 996, 1041, 1042.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wicksteed, P. H., 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wieseler, Karl, 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiggers, G. F., 597, 644</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilberforce, R. I., 671, 679, 680, 693, 696, 697, 698, 969.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilberforce, Samuel, 472, 830</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilder, Burt G., 470</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilkin, G. F., 591, 988</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1137'/><anchor id='Pg1137'/>

<lg>
<l>Wilkinson, W. C., 40, 182, 197, 294, 398, 641, 957, 980.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilkinson, W. F., 761</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilkinson, W. F., 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Willard, Frances E., 918, 978</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>William III, 512</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>William of Occam, 45, 244, 298, 299, 909</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, A. P., 980</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, &mdash;&mdash;, 918</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, Leighton, 208, 890</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, M. Monier, 183, 352, 382</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, N. M., 577</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, Roger, 369, 949</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, Rowland, 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, W., 790</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Willis, N. P., 570</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Willmarth, J. W., 948, 1023</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilson, C. T., 915</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilson, J. M., 719</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilson, Woodrow, 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winchell, Alexander, 476</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Windelband, Wilhelm, 379</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winer, G. B., 523, 717</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winslow, Edward, 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Withrow, J. L., 914</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witsius, H., 46, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wörter, Friedrich, 598</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wollaston, William, 361</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wood, N. E., 942</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wood, N. R., 381</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wood, W. C., 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woods, F. H., 171</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woods, Leonard, 48, 49, 268, 608, 773, 826, 828, 836, 881, 886, 1015.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woolman, John, 760</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woolsey, T. D., 229, 741, 943, 1045</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wordsworth, C., 68, 441, 458, 622</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wordsworth, William, 30, 39, 58, 59, 103, 252, 380, 406, 441, 489, 501, 568, 576, 599, 958, 991, 1022.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wortman, J. L., 478</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wotton, Henry, 523</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wright, Charles H. H., 167, 405, 476</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wright, Chauncey, 76, 428</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wright, G. F., 130, 154, 224, 225, 357, 432, 469, 471, 478, 708, 1040, 1043, 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wright, T. H., 120, 454, 456</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wrightnour, J. S., 214, 667, 699, 764</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wu Ting Fang, 180</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wünsche, Aug. de, 726</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wundt, Wilhelm, 43, 281, 505</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wuttke, Adolph, 62, 179, 182, 184, 185, 302, 516, 539, 581.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wynne, F. H., 154, 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xenophon, 143, 148, 941</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Young, Edward, 296, 557</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Young, John, 189, 190, 367, 728, 734</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zahn, &mdash;&mdash;, 278</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zahn, A., 735</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zahn, Th., 707, 735</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeller, Edward, 38, 512</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeno, 184</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zinzendorf, Count N. L., 900</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zöckler, Otto, 42, 225, 377, 397, 474, 478, 482, 514.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zoroaster, 382</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zwingle, Ulrich, 45, 237, 621, 903, 957</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='1139'/><anchor id='Pg1139'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index Of Scripture Texts.</head>

<lg>
<l>Genesis.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1: &mdash; 35.</l>

<lg>
<l>1:1 &mdash; 309, 326, 333.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:2 &mdash; 68, 134, 223, 287, 316, 318, 324, 326, 339, 378, 446.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1-3 &mdash; 286.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:11 &mdash; 418.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:24 &mdash; 465.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:26, &mdash; 318, 524.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:26, 27 &mdash; 514, 991.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:27 &mdash; 465.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:27, 28 &mdash; 476, 494.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:27-31 &mdash; 490.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:31 &mdash; 450, 488, 514, 521.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:2 &mdash; 412, 494.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:3 &mdash; 408.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:4 &mdash; 395.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 197, 198, 340, 465, 469, 494, 523, 550, 991.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7, 22 &mdash; 476.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:8 &mdash; 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:9 &mdash; 526, 527.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:16 &mdash; 524.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:17 &mdash; 584, 590, 656, 660, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:19, 20 &mdash; 524.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:23 &mdash; 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1 &mdash; 584.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1, 4 &mdash; 454.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1, 5 &mdash; 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1-7 &mdash; 582.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1-15 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:3 &mdash; 584, 590.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:4 &mdash; 461.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:4, 5, 6 &mdash; 584.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:5 &mdash; 572.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:8 &mdash; 523, 524, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:9 &mdash; 592.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:10 &mdash; 224.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:12 &mdash; 566.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:14 &mdash; 450.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:15 &mdash; 175, 667, 676.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16-19 &mdash; 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:17-19 &mdash; 658.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:19 &mdash; 656.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:20 &mdash; 476, 477.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:21 &mdash; 726.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:22 &mdash; 523, 524, 585.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:22, 23 &mdash; 991.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:24 &mdash; 449.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:1 &mdash; 494, 665.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:3 &mdash; 408.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:3, 4 &mdash; 593, 726.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:14 &mdash; 476.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:16 &mdash; 593.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:17 &mdash; 476.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:26 &mdash; 311.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:3 &mdash; 494, 517.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:6 &mdash; 225.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:24 &mdash; 995.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:1, 2 &mdash; 476.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:2 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:3 &mdash; 324, 604, 652.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:6 &mdash; 258, 266.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:19 &mdash; 223.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:1 &mdash; 258.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:10-12 &mdash; 408.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:20, 21 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:2, 3 &mdash; 524.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:6 &mdash; 515.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:13 &mdash; 396.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:19 &mdash; 476.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:20-27 &mdash; 230.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:25 &mdash; 365.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:6, 13, 15, 16 &mdash; 224.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11: &mdash; 896.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:5 &mdash; 523.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:7 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:15 &mdash; 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:5 &mdash; 888.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:6 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:13 &mdash; 227.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:16 &mdash; 638.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:9-13 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:13 &mdash; 283, 284.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:1 &mdash; 286.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:8-13 &mdash; 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:2 &mdash; 451.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:2, 13 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:8 &mdash; 443.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:14 &mdash; 287.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:15 &mdash; 523.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:19 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:25 &mdash; 290.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:24 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:26 &mdash; 432.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:30-38 &mdash; 230.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:6 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:7 &mdash; 710.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:12 &mdash; 447.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:13 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:8-14 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:11 &mdash; 464.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:11-16 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:13 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:16 &mdash; 266.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:9 &mdash; 51.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:8, 9 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:19-24 &mdash; 230.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28: &mdash; 134.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:5 &mdash; 280.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:12 &mdash; 463.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29:27, 28 &mdash; 408.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:11, 13 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:24 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:1, 2 &mdash; 463.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:2 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:13, 14 &mdash; 765.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:20 &mdash; 720.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:24 &mdash; 463.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:24-28 &mdash; 258.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35:1, 6, 9 &mdash; 259.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35:7 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35:18 &mdash; 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35:29 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39:19 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40:1 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41:8 &mdash; 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41:41-44 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>46:26 &mdash; 494.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>47:9 &mdash; 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>47:31 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>48:15, 16 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>48:16 &mdash; 463.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>49: &mdash; 134.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>49:26 &mdash; 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>50:20 &mdash; 355, 365, 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exodus.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16 &mdash; 442.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:24, 25 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1140'/><anchor id='Pg1140'/>

<lg>
<l>3:2 &mdash; 451.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2,4,5 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:4 &mdash; 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:5 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:12 &mdash; 713.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:14 &mdash; 253, 257, 275.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:14-16 &mdash; 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:16 &mdash; 307.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:21 &mdash; 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:3 &mdash; 257.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:1 &mdash; 200, 307.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:12 &mdash; 733.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:13 &mdash; 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:8, 15 &mdash; 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:27 &mdash; 832.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:28 &mdash; 459.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:36 &mdash; 422.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:40, 41 &mdash; 227.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:2, 13 &mdash; 761.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:14 &mdash; 241.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:23 &mdash; 1050.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:11 &mdash; 268.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:5 &mdash; 408.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:20 &mdash; 630, 644.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:10-16 &mdash; 268.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:1-17 &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:3 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:8 &mdash; 408, 558.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:12 &mdash; 230.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:22 &mdash; 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:23 &mdash; 169.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:24 &mdash; 169.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:25 &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:6 &mdash; 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:28 &mdash; 307.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:7 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:9-12 &mdash; 775.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:22 &mdash; 653.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:2, 3 &mdash; 197.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:19 &mdash; 540.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:24 &mdash; 418.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:30, 32 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:18 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:18, 20 &mdash; 150.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:31, 32 &mdash; 837.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34:10 &mdash; 337.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>35:25 &mdash; 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36:21, 22 &mdash; 367, 397, 653.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>39:7 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leviticus.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 554.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:4 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:14, 20, 31 &mdash; 554.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:20, 31, 35 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:5, 6 &mdash; 554.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:10-16 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:11 &mdash; 554.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:17 &mdash; 652, 647, 718.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:7 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:15 &mdash; 932.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:44 &mdash; 269.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:8 &mdash; 554.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:45 &mdash; 555.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:17 &mdash; 732.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:1-34 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:8 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:16, 21 &mdash; 552.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:21 &mdash; 765.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:21, 22 &mdash; 720.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:12 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:27 &mdash; 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:28 &mdash; 995.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:4-6 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Numbers.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1 &mdash; 432.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:24-26 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:24, 26 &mdash; 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:89 &mdash; 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:1 &mdash; 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:6-8 &mdash; 203.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:34 &mdash; 718.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:22 &mdash; 465, 484.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:35 &mdash; 907.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:29 &mdash; 656.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:30 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:29, 33 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:5 &mdash; 197, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:19 &mdash; 258, 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:21 &mdash; 454, 856.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:9 &mdash; 227.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:13 &mdash; 719, 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:28 &mdash; 552.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:3 &mdash; 657.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:16 &mdash; 465.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:23 &mdash; 295.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:2 &mdash; 169.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deuteronomy.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6, 7 &mdash; 549.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:39 &mdash; 661.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:19 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:4 &mdash; 259.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:2 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:3 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:6 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:2, 6 &mdash; 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:3 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:10, 11 &mdash; 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:15 &mdash; 139, 711.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:1-8 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:23 &mdash; 718.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:3 &mdash; 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:1 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29:29 &mdash; 36, 364.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:4 &mdash; 260, 290.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:40 &mdash; 275.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:2 &mdash; 447, 452.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joshua.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:1-24 &mdash; 230.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:18 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:20 &mdash; 832.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:12, 13 &mdash; 223.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:2 &mdash; 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judges.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:17-22 &mdash; 230.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:24 &mdash; 230.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:30 &mdash; 231.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:17, 36-40 &mdash; 116.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:14, 15 &mdash; 241.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:20-22 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:24, 25 &mdash; 197.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:12 &mdash; 408.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:18 &mdash; 552.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1 Samuel.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1: &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:11 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:19 &mdash; 226.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:27 &mdash; 199.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10: &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:11 &mdash; 258.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:24 &mdash; 832.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:29 &mdash; 258.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:1 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:1 &mdash; 799.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:10 &mdash; 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:12 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:18 &mdash; 422.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:7-14 &mdash; 995, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:19 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29:4 &mdash; 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 Samuel.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:7 &mdash; 939.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:1-4 &mdash; 230.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:23 &mdash; 662.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:20 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:10 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:33 &mdash; 769.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:23 &mdash; 206.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:1 &mdash; 423, 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1 Kings.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:27 &mdash; 278.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:27 &mdash; 105, 254, 281, 523.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:46 &mdash; 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:9 &mdash; 294.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:15-24 &mdash; 355.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:4, 9 &mdash; 443.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:21 &mdash; 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:36-38 &mdash; 116.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:36-38 &mdash; 116, 437.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1141'/><anchor id='Pg1141'/>

<lg>
<l>18:42-45 &mdash; 433.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:5 &mdash; &mdash; 452.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:15 &mdash; 433.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22: &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:19 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:23 &mdash; 457.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 Kings.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11 &mdash; 995, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:1-7 &mdash; 465.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:26 &mdash; 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:17 &mdash; 451, 459.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:6, 24, 26, 28, 33 &mdash; 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:35 &mdash; 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:8 &mdash; 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:2 &mdash; 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1 Chronicles.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:1 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:14 &mdash; 226.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:16 &mdash; 225.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 Chronicles.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:2 &mdash; 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:3, 17 &mdash; 226.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:12, 13 &mdash; 439.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:14-19 &mdash; 226.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:18 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29:27 &mdash; 765.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:31 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34:19 &mdash; 543, 836.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36:22 &mdash; 197.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ezra.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4: &mdash; 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:22 &mdash; 899.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:6 &mdash; 634.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nehemiah.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6 &mdash; 594, 634.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:12, 18 &mdash; 409.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:6 &mdash; 412, 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esther.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:1 &mdash; 429.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Job.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6 &mdash; 454.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6-12 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9 &mdash; 461.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9, 11 &mdash; 454.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:11 &mdash; 459.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12 &mdash; 425.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12, 16, 19 &mdash; 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:4, 5 &mdash; 454.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:5 &mdash; 459.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6 &mdash; 425.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:8 &mdash; 406.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:13, 18 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:18 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:9 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:20 &mdash; 282, 412.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:7 &mdash; 34.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:7, 9 &mdash; 254.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:23 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:4 &mdash; 578, 661.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:5 &mdash; 355.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:15 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:25 &mdash; 667.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:25, 27 &mdash; 995, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:7 &mdash; 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:10 &mdash; 431.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:13 &mdash; 252, 359.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:13, 14 &mdash; 259.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:1 &mdash; 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:5 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:6 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:14 &mdash; 143, 287.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:3 &mdash; 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:5 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:5, 6 &mdash; 275.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:37 &mdash; 275.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:8 &mdash; 197, 198, 469, 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:18 &mdash; 338.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:4 &mdash; 484.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34:14, 15 &mdash; 338.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37:5, 10 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>38:7 &mdash; 446, 451, 453.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42:5, 6 &mdash; 543, 832.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42:6 &mdash; 833.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42:7-9 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Psalms.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6 &mdash; 780, 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:1-4 &mdash; 541.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6-8 &mdash; 775.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 318, 322, 340.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7-8 &mdash; 356.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:8 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:5 &mdash; 290.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:12 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:9-12 &mdash; 290.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:11 &mdash; 245, 258, 645.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:12, 13 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8: &mdash; 706.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:3, 4 &mdash; 249.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:4-8 &mdash; 678.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:5 &mdash; 515.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:5-6 &mdash; 697.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:5-8 &mdash; 524.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:6 &mdash; 775.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:7 &mdash; 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:3 &mdash; 817.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:6 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:10 &mdash; 63.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:1 &mdash; 217.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16: &mdash; 675.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:7 &mdash; 32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:9-11 &mdash; 995, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17: &mdash; 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:13, 14 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:24-26 &mdash; 290.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:30 &mdash; 260.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19: &mdash; 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:1 &mdash; 27, 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:1-6 &mdash; 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:7 &mdash; 538.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:12 &mdash; 553, 558, 578, 647.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:12,13 &mdash; 650.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:13 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:20 &mdash; 458.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:26 &mdash; 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:28 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:2 &mdash; 364.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:7, 8 &mdash; 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:11 &mdash; 314, 401.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:14 &mdash; 40.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:9 &mdash; 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29:1, 2 &mdash; 451.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29:3 &mdash; 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:5 &mdash; 746.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32: &mdash; 431.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:1 &mdash; 552.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:1, 2 &mdash; 851.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:6 &mdash; 700.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:8 &mdash; 440.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:6 &mdash; 318, 326, 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:9 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:13-15 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:14, 15 &mdash; 422.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34:7 &mdash; 463.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>34:8 &mdash; 4, 825.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36:1 &mdash; 40.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36:6 &mdash; 412.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36:9 &mdash; 350.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37: &mdash; 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37:7 &mdash; 439.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40:5 &mdash; 283.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40:6-8 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42:6 &mdash; 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42:7 &mdash; 694, 942.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>44:3 &mdash; 369, 786.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>45:2 &mdash; 678.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>45:6 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>45:6, 7 &mdash; 322.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>49: &mdash; 113.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1142'/><anchor id='Pg1142'/>

<lg>
<l>49:15 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>49:20 &mdash; 642.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>50:5 &mdash; 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51: &mdash; 833.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51:1, 2, 10, 14 &mdash; 832.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51:2 &mdash; 552.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51:3, 7, 11 &mdash; 832.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51:4 &mdash; 573, 646, 757.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51:4-6 &mdash; 645.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51:5 &mdash; 578, 661, 1043.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51:6 &mdash; 555, 558, 578, 647.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51:6, 7 &mdash; 578.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51:10 &mdash; 519, 782, 810, 829, 833.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51:11 &mdash; 317.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>51:17 &mdash; 792.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>56:8 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>58:3 &mdash; 578.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>59:10 &mdash; 364, 819.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>63:8 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>66:7 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>68:10 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>68:17 &mdash; 447, 1052.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>68:18 &mdash; 309, 758.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>69:2 &mdash; 942.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>69:9 &mdash; 724.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>71:15 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>72:6 &mdash; 518.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>72:15 &mdash; 314.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>72:18 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>73: &mdash; 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>74:5 &mdash; 155.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>75:6, 7 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>76:10 &mdash; 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>77:19, 20 &mdash; 119.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>78:25 &mdash; 443, 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>78:41 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>78:49 &mdash; 457.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>81:12, 13 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>82:1 &mdash; 307.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>82:6 &mdash; 380, 515.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>82:6, 7 &mdash; 307.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>82:7 &mdash; 614.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>84:11 &mdash; 289, 336.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>85:4 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>85:8 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>85:9 &mdash; 687.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>85:10 &mdash; 298, 754.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>85:10, 11 &mdash; 245.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>86:11 &mdash; 346.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>87:4 &mdash; 812.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>88:35 &mdash; 399.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>89:3 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>89:7 &mdash; 450.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>90:2 &mdash; 275, 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>90:7, 8 &mdash; 658.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>90:7-9 &mdash; 657.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>90:8 &mdash; 577.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>90:16, 17 &mdash; 819.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>91:11 &mdash; 452.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>93:1 &mdash; 223.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>94:9, 10 &mdash; 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>94:10 &mdash; 666.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>96:10 &mdash; 403.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>97:2 &mdash; 272, 292, 296.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>97:7 &mdash; 306.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>97:10 &mdash; 294, 646, 743.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>97:11 &mdash; 667.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>99:4, 5, 9 &mdash; 296.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>101:4 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>101:5, 6 &mdash; 294.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>102:13, 14 &mdash; 275.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>102:27 &mdash; 257, 275.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>103:19 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>103:20 &mdash; 445, 451.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>104: &mdash; 412.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>104:4 &mdash; 451.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>104:14 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>104:16 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>104:21, 28 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>104:24 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>104:26 &mdash; 412.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>104:29, 30 &mdash; 412.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>105:15 &mdash; 710, 856.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>106:12, 13 &mdash; 837.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>106:13 &mdash; 440.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>106:30 &mdash; 737.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>107:20 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>107:23, 28 &mdash; 431.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>110:3 &mdash; 784, 792, 830.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>113:4-6 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>113:5 &mdash; 105, 280.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>113:5, 6 &mdash; 249, 255, 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>114:1 &mdash; 401, 788.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>115:3 &mdash; 122, 287.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>116:1-8 &mdash; 437.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>116:15 &mdash; 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>118: &mdash; 675.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>118:22 &mdash; 795.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>118:22, 23 &mdash; 138.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>119:18 &mdash; 35.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>119:36 &mdash; 519, 819, 825.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>119:89 &mdash; 298, 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>119:89-91 &mdash; 355.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>119:96 &mdash; 542.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>121:3 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>123:1 &mdash; 280.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>124:2 &mdash; 425.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>124:4, 5 &mdash; 942.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>130:4 &mdash; 855.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>132:1 &mdash; 1043.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>135:6, 7 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>138:2 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>139:2 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>139:6 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>139:7 &mdash; 105, 280, 316.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>139:12 &mdash; 283.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>139:13, 14 &mdash; 491.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>139:15, 16 &mdash; 495.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>139:16 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>139:17, 18 &mdash; 284.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>140:5 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>143:2 &mdash; 573, 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>143:11 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>144:12 &mdash; 898.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>145:3 &mdash; 254.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>145:5 &mdash; 292.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>146:4 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>147:4 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>147:15-18 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>147:20 &mdash; 779.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>148:2-5 &mdash; 444.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>149:6 &mdash; 646.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proverbs.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:6 &mdash; 440.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:19 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:18 &mdash; 827.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:22 &mdash; 633, 652.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:1 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:22, 30, 31 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:22-31 &mdash; 341.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:23 &mdash; 309, 378.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:36 &mdash; 786.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:9 &mdash; 649.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:13 &mdash; 294.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:1 &mdash; 422.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:4 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:14 &mdash; 720.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:32 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:33 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:15 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:21 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:9 &mdash; 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:24 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:27 &mdash; 22, 486.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:1 &mdash; 423, 784.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>30:4 &mdash; 318, 341.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:4 &mdash; 231.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:6-7 &mdash; 231.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecclesiastes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11 &mdash; 404.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:21 &mdash; 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:20 &mdash; 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:29 &mdash; 517.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:10 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:3 &mdash; 1001.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:7 &mdash; 469, 483, 490, 991, 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Song Of Solomon.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:4 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1143'/><anchor id='Pg1143'/>

<lg>
<l>Isaiah.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1 &mdash; 239.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5 &mdash; 553.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:5 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:11 &mdash; 661.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:4 &mdash; 404, 792.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:13 &mdash; 135.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:16 &mdash; 269.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:18 &mdash; 650.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:23 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:1 &mdash; 309.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:3 &mdash; 256, 268, 296, 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:5 &mdash; 555, 634.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:5, 7 &mdash; 268.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:8 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7: &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:9 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:10-13 &mdash; 437.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:14-16 &mdash; 138, 1007.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8: &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:20 &mdash; 114, 440.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:6 &mdash; 322, 680, 697, 797, 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:6, 7 &mdash; 138, 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:5 &mdash; 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:5, 7 &mdash; 442.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:16 &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:7 &mdash; 221.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:12 &mdash; 518.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:26, 27 &mdash; 355.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:1 &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:22 &mdash; 139.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:4 &mdash; 669.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:7 &mdash; 666.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:19 &mdash; 995, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:16 &mdash; 795, 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:21 &mdash; 126, 1053.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:6 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37:34-37 &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>38:17, 18 &mdash; 657.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40:3 &mdash; 309, 506.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40:18 &mdash; 119, 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40:15, 16 &mdash; 399.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>40:66 &mdash; 239.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41:4 &mdash; 275.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41:8 &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41:20 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41:21, 22 &mdash; 285.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>41:23 &mdash; 135.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42:1 &mdash; 138, 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42:1-7 &mdash; 137, 697.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42:9 &mdash; 135.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42:16 &mdash; 426, 441.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42:19 &mdash; 649.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>42:21 &mdash; 740, 749.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>43:7 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>44:6 &mdash; 259.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>44:24 &mdash; 286.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>44:28 &mdash; 136, 197, 282, 355.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>45:5 &mdash; 197, 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>45:7, 8 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>45:22 &mdash; 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>46:9, 10 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>46:10, 11 &mdash; 355.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>48:11 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>48:16 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>48:18 &mdash; 284.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>49:1-12 &mdash; 696, 697.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>49:50, 61 &mdash; 675.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>50:2 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>52:2 &mdash; 678.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>52:10 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>53: &mdash; 137, 138.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>53:1-12 &mdash; 725.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>53:4, 10 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>53:5 &mdash; 732.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>53:5, 6 &mdash; 720.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>53:6 &mdash; 265.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>53:6-12 &mdash; 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>53:10 &mdash; 680, 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>53:10, 11 &mdash; 697.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>53:11 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>53:12 &mdash; 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>54:5 &mdash; 796.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>55:6 &mdash; 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>57:2 &mdash; 439.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>57:15 &mdash; 105, 280.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>57:16 &mdash; 491.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>57:19 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>59:2 &mdash; 198, 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>59:20 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>60:21 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>61:1 &mdash; 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>61:3 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>63:7, 10 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>63:9 &mdash; 266.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>63:10 &mdash; 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>64:4 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>65:12 &mdash; 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>65:17 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>65:22 &mdash; 888.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>65:24 &mdash; 364.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>66:1 &mdash; 254.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>66:11 &mdash; 523.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>66:13 &mdash; 323.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeremiah.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:4 &mdash; 27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:15 &mdash; 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:20 &mdash; 796.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:25 &mdash; 394.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:9 &mdash; 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:23, 24 &mdash; 245.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:24 &mdash; 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:10 &mdash; 245, 251.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:23 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:24 &mdash; 272, 653.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:21 &mdash; 578.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:23 &mdash; 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:20 &mdash; 594.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:9 &mdash; 553, 578.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:8 &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:7 &mdash; 240.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:6 &mdash; 943.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:23, 24 &mdash; 105, 280.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:29 &mdash; 811</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:7 &mdash; 4, 825.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:5 &mdash; 833.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:13, 19 &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:3 &mdash; 788, 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:18 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:22 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:33 &mdash; 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:18 &mdash; 634.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36:23 &mdash; 540.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>44:4 &mdash; 295, 418, 652.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>45:5 &mdash; 410.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>55:34, 44 &mdash; 241.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamentations.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12 &mdash; 757.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:39-45 &mdash; 634.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:7 &mdash; 718.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:21 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ezekiel.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1: &mdash; 449.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5, 12 &mdash; 449.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 789.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10: &mdash; 449.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:19 &mdash; 810, 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:6 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:4 &mdash; 633.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:31 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:32 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:5 &mdash; 630.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:7-14 &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:14-19 &mdash; 450.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:22 &mdash; 272.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>29:17-20 &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>32:21 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:9, 11 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>33:11 &mdash; 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36:21, 22 &mdash; 272.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>36:26 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37:1-14 &mdash; 995, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37:6 &mdash; 449.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>37:9-14 &mdash; 339.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daniel.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:28, 36 &mdash; 711.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:45 &mdash; 141.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18 &mdash; 426.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:25, 28 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:31 &mdash; 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:35 &mdash; 355, 431.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1144'/><anchor id='Pg1144'/>

<lg>
<l>6:22 &mdash; 452.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:10 &mdash; 449.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:13 &mdash; 141, 678, 682.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:27 &mdash; 141.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:14 &mdash; 139.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:19 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:31 &mdash; 141.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:36 &mdash; 138, 454.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:1 &mdash; 141.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:2 &mdash; 1000, 1018.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:2, 3, 13 &mdash; 995, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:3 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:8, 9 &mdash; 139.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hosea.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:2-5 &mdash; 796.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:17 &mdash; 424, 652, 790.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:18 &mdash; 792.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:7 &mdash; 614.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:1, 2 &mdash; 614.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:1 &mdash; 138, 235.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:8 &mdash; 790, 1053.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:3, 4 &mdash; 463.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:5 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:9 &mdash; 1050.</l>
</lg>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joel.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:12-14 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:28 &mdash; 587.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amos.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1: &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:2 &mdash; 135.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2: &mdash; 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2 &mdash; 780, 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:8 &mdash; 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:9 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:14 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jonah.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:9 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:3 241.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:4 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:4, 10 &mdash; 258.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:10 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:11 661.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Micah.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:12 138.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:2 322.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:8 299.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:3 650.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:18 855.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nahum.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Habakkuk.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:13 &mdash; 418.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:4 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:4 &mdash; 143.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:20 &mdash; 713.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haggai.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:13 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zechariah.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1 &mdash; 454.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1-3 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2 &mdash; 454, 458, 856.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:2, 3 &mdash; 888.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1 &mdash; 355.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:8 &mdash; 753.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:1-4 &mdash; 239.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:1 &mdash; 469, 483, 491, 991.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:10 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malachi.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6 &mdash; 638, 639.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 474.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:15 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1 &mdash; 322.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:6 &mdash; 257, 259.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:10 &mdash; 287, 438.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4 &mdash; 114.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matthew.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1 &mdash; 225.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1-16 &mdash; 687.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1-17 &mdash; 673.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12 &mdash; 826.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:20 319, &mdash; 686.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:22, 23 &mdash; 138.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:15 138, &mdash; 235.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:22 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1-12 &mdash; 836.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2, 3, 6 &mdash; 945.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:3 &mdash; 309.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:6 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:6-11 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:7 &mdash; 981</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:8 &mdash; 835.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:9 &mdash; 287.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:11 &mdash; 287, 935.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:13 &mdash; 940.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:13, 17 &mdash; 932.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:14 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:15 &mdash; 717, 761, 853, 943.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16 &mdash; 696.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16, 17 &mdash; 325.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:17 &mdash; 148, 209, 216, 341, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:1-11 &mdash; 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:2 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:3 &mdash; 461.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:3, 6, 9 &mdash; 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4 &mdash; 16, 412.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4, 6, 7 &mdash; 199.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:6, 7 &mdash; 217.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:10 &mdash; 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:11 &mdash; 452, 453.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1 &mdash; 227.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1-12 &mdash; 554.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:3 &mdash; 669.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:7 &mdash; 37.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5-8: &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:8 &mdash; 4, 67, 246, 524, 825.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:10 &mdash; 230.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5-7: &mdash; 711.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:17 &mdash; 718.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:17, 18 &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:18 &mdash; 199, 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:19 &mdash; 939.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:21, 22 &mdash; 545, 645.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:22 &mdash; 553.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:27, 28 &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:23, 24 &mdash; 719, 924.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:22, 28 &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:28 &mdash; 553.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:32 &mdash; 242.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:33, 34 &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:34 &mdash; 306.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:38, 39 &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:39-42 &mdash; 546.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:44 &mdash; 264.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:44, 45 &mdash; 289, 475.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:45 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:48 &mdash; 260, 290, 302, 543, 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:8 &mdash; 282, 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:9, 10 &mdash; 272.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:10 &mdash; 368, 434, 450, 792.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:12 &mdash; 645, 835.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:12-14 &mdash; 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:13 &mdash; 256, 450.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:16 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:20 &mdash; 981.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:22, 23 &mdash; 486, 501.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:24 &mdash; 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:26 &mdash; 421, 440.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:30 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:32, 33 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:33 &mdash; 289, 401, 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:11 &mdash; 578.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:22 &mdash; 117, 780.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1145'/><anchor id='Pg1145'/>

<lg>
<l>7:23 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:11 &mdash; 772.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:11, 12 &mdash; 842, 843.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:22 &mdash; 659, 902, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:24 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:28 &mdash; 227, 446.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:29 &mdash; 457, 1002</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:31 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:2 &mdash; 826.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:4 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:5 &mdash; 128.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:6 &mdash; 682.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:12 &mdash; 192.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:12, 13 &mdash; 574.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:24 &mdash; 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:36 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:56 &mdash; 129.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:1 &mdash; 201.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:15 &mdash; 649, 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:17, 19, 20 &mdash; 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:20 &mdash; 206.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:26 &mdash; 283.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:28 &mdash; 459, 483, 660, 991, 1055.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:29 &mdash; 282, 421, 851, 991.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:30 &mdash; 282, 420, 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:32 &mdash; 645, 889.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:38 &mdash; 718, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:40 &mdash; 516.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:41 &mdash; 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:42 &mdash; 948.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:3, 4, 5 &mdash; 156.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:9 &mdash; 710.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:10 &mdash; 199.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:12 &mdash; 830.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:19 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:21 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:23 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:24 &mdash; 638.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:25, 26 &mdash; 789.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:27 &mdash; 163, 246, 334, 681, 691.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:28 &mdash; 611, 683, 744, 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:28, 29 &mdash; 838.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:29 &mdash; 189.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:10-13 &mdash; 541.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:28 &mdash; 129, 316.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:31 &mdash; 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:31, 32 &mdash; 464, 650, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:32 &mdash; 652.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:33 &mdash; 507, 826.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:33-35 &mdash; 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:34 &mdash; 578.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:34, 35 &mdash; 889.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:36 &mdash; 554.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:37 &mdash; 851.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:39 &mdash; 126, 137, 438.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:41 &mdash; 948.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:43 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:43, 45 &mdash; 458.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:45 &mdash; 806.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:5, 6 &mdash; 589.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:19 &mdash; 27, 450, 506.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:20 &mdash; 281.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:20, 21 &mdash; 837.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:23 &mdash; 462.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:24 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:24-30 &mdash; 354.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:28 &mdash; 588.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:30 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:30, 38 &mdash; 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:31, 32 &mdash; 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:33 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:38 &mdash; 592, 887.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:39 &mdash; 454, 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:52 &mdash; 19, 41.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:57 &mdash; 711.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:19 &mdash; 465.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:23 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:2 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:13, 14 &mdash; 42.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:18 &mdash; 506.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:19 &mdash; 553, 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:15 &mdash; 851.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:18 &mdash; 887.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:18, 19 &mdash; 909.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:25 &mdash; 642.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:26 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:27 &mdash; 1011.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:27, 28 &mdash; 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:28 &mdash; 1003.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:1-8 &mdash; 678.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:2 &mdash; 696.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:5 &mdash; 210.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:8 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:15, 18 &mdash; 456.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:17 &mdash; 126.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:20 &mdash; 900.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:34 &mdash; 1021.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:5, 6, 10, 14 &mdash; 661.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:10 &mdash; 450, 451, 452, 954.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:14 &mdash; 662, 851.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:15-17 &mdash; 924.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:17 &mdash; 890, 892, 907.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:18 &mdash; 925.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:19 &mdash; 927.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:19, 20 &mdash; 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:20 &mdash; 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:24, 25 &mdash; 749.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:3-10 &mdash; 242.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:8 &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:14 &mdash; 648, 661, 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:17 &mdash; 894.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:19 &mdash; 264.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:26 &mdash; 287.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:29 &mdash; 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:3 &mdash; 489.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:12-15 &mdash; 779.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:13, 15 &mdash; 786.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:17-23 &mdash; 932.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:22 &mdash; 743.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:28 &mdash; 483, 673, 697, 717, 750.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:30 &mdash; 210, 227.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:2 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:21 &mdash; 437.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:25 &mdash; 931.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:42 &mdash; 138.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:3 &mdash; 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:21 &mdash; 898.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:23 &mdash; 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:30 &mdash; 445, 447.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:31, 32 &mdash; 995, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:32 &mdash; 999, 1017.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:37 &mdash; 302.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:37-39 &mdash; 572.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:37-40 &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:42 &mdash; 669.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:43 &mdash; 314.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:8, 10 &mdash; 898.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:23 &mdash; 638.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:32 &mdash; 648.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:33 &mdash; 1055.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:35 &mdash; 315.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:37 &mdash; 1005.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:37, 38 &mdash; 1053.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24: &mdash; 138.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:2 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:5, 11, 12, 24 &mdash; 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:14 &mdash; 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:15 &mdash; 141.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:23 &mdash; 1003.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:29, 30 &mdash; 1009.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:30 &mdash; 1003.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:34 &mdash; 138.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:35 &mdash; 350.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:36 &mdash; 445, 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25: &mdash; 138.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:1-13 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:10 &mdash; 1001, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:19 &mdash; 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:24 &mdash; 293.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:27 &mdash; 540.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:29 &mdash; 986.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:31 &mdash; 138, 315, 453, 1004.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:31, 32 &mdash; 310, 683, 775.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:31-39 &mdash; 1011.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:31, 46 &mdash; 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:32 &mdash; 163.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:34 &mdash; 790.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:41 &mdash; 448, 455, 457, 464, 660, 790.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:41-46 &mdash; 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:45 &mdash; 648.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:45, 46 &mdash; 662.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:46 &mdash; 293, 1044, 1045, 1055.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:24 &mdash; 365, 1043.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:26, 28 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1146'/><anchor id='Pg1146'/>

<lg>
<l>26:26, 29 &mdash; 901.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:27 &mdash; 960.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:28 &mdash; 210, 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:29 &mdash; 959, 960.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:34 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:37 &mdash; 325.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:38 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:39 &mdash; 298, 438, 698, 718, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:39, 53 &mdash; 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:53 &mdash; 448, 703.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:53, 54 &mdash; 755.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:60-75 &mdash; 230.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:63-64 &mdash; 313.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:64 &mdash; 141.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:3, 4 &mdash; 832.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:9 &mdash; 226.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:18 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:37 &mdash; 228.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:42 &mdash; 677, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:46 &mdash; 742, 743, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:50 &mdash; 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:1 &mdash; 410.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:2 &mdash; 453.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:4 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:18 &mdash; 163, 775.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:18-20 &mdash; 708.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:19 &mdash; 219, 316, 895, 899, 931, 942, 945, 948, 951, 952.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:19, 20 &mdash; 905, 916, 932.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:20 &mdash; 163, 242, 310, 460, 685, 697, 699, 801, 846, 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:29 &mdash; 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28:4-6 &mdash; 1003.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mark.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5, 8 &mdash; 935.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5, 9 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9, 10 &mdash; 935.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:41 &mdash; 118.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 682.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:27 &mdash; 409, 546.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:5 &mdash; 674, 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:11, 12 &mdash; 456.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:17 &mdash; 152.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:29 &mdash; 463, 650, 1041, 1046, 1048, 1055.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:15 &mdash; 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:39 &mdash; 682.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:2, 4 &mdash; 456.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:9 &mdash; 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:19 &mdash; 190.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:39, 40 &mdash; 659.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:41 &mdash; 696.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:4 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:13 &mdash; 199.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:14 &mdash; 738.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:15 &mdash; 546.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:34 &mdash; 126.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:4 &mdash; 190.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:27, 29 &mdash; 175.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:36, 37 &mdash; 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:38 &mdash; 450.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:24 &mdash; 848.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:25 &mdash; 456.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:29 &mdash; 458.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:43, 48 &mdash; 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:2 &mdash; 546.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:5 &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:11 &mdash; 242.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:18 &mdash; 302.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:21 &mdash; 638, 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:21, 22 &mdash; 571.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:23 &mdash; 269.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:32 &mdash; 678, 760.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:38 &mdash; 940, 942.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:39 &mdash; 936.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:45 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:24 &mdash; 433.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:29, 30 &mdash; 543.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:30 &mdash; 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:30, 31 &mdash; 543.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:19 &mdash; 378.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:27 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:32 &mdash; 314, 446, 677, 695, 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:15 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:23 &mdash; 960.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:24 &mdash; 210, 959.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:25 &mdash; 959.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:27 &mdash; 199.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:23 &mdash; 742.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:26 &mdash; 228.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:45 &mdash; 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:9-20 &mdash; 239, 573, 931.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:15 &mdash; 604, 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:16 &mdash; 573, 662, 931.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:19 &mdash; 708.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luke.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1-4 &mdash; 238.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6 &mdash; 852.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:34, 35 &mdash; 675.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:35 &mdash; 309, 325, 339, 677, 686, 689.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:37 &mdash; 854.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:38 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:46 &mdash; 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:52 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11 &mdash; 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:13 &mdash; 448, 453.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:21 &mdash; 943.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:21, 22, 23, 24 &mdash; 761.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:24 &mdash; 554, 943.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:25 &mdash; 1007.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:34 &mdash; 789.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:40, 46, 49, 52 &mdash; 675.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18 &mdash; 836.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:21, 22 &mdash; 325.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:22 &mdash; 216.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:23-38 &mdash; 673.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:38 &mdash; 474, 475.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4-12 &mdash; 199.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:13 &mdash; 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:14 &mdash; 325.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:22 &mdash; 678.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:25-27 &mdash; 786.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:34 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1 &mdash; 27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:6-9 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:8 &mdash; 296, 555.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:20, 21 &mdash; 696.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:17 &mdash; 227.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:19 &mdash; 696.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:43-45 &mdash; 578.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:13 &mdash; 130.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:29 &mdash; 851.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:35 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:30, 31 &mdash; 456.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:22-24 &mdash; 716.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:24 &mdash; 943.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:17, 18 &mdash; 456.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:27 &mdash; 346.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:30-37 &mdash; 574.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:31 &mdash; 428.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:11 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:13 &mdash; 573, 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:20 &mdash; 118.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:27 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:27, 28 &mdash; 208.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:29 &mdash; 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:49 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:4, 5 &mdash; 1055.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:12 &mdash; 324, 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:14 &mdash; 241.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:47, 48 &mdash; 648, 649, 1050.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:48 &mdash; 558.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:49 &mdash; 936.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:50 &mdash; 645, 718, 762, 932, 936, 940, 942.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:56 &mdash; 760.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:2, 3 &mdash; 630.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:4 &mdash; 645.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:11, 16 &mdash; 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:17 &mdash; 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:23, 24 &mdash; 35.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:33 &mdash; 711.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:23 &mdash; 234, 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15: &mdash; 516, 784.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:8 &mdash; 515.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:10, 24 &mdash; 836.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:11-32 &mdash; 241, 474.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:12, 13 &mdash; 572.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:17 &mdash; 338, 558.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:18 &mdash; 833.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:23, 24 &mdash; 856.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1147'/><anchor id='Pg1147'/>

<lg>
<l>15:32 &mdash; 659, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:1-8 &mdash; 241.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:18 &mdash; 242.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:22 &mdash; 452, 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:23 &mdash; 994, 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:23 &mdash; 994, 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:26 &mdash; 1001, 1042, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:32 &mdash; 446.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:3 &mdash; 835.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:5 &mdash; 804, 848.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:7-10 &mdash; 293.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:20 &mdash; 892.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:7 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:13 &mdash; 556, 720, 741, 834.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:23 &mdash; 832.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:35 &mdash; 210, 227.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:8 &mdash; 835.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:8, 9 &mdash; 836.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:23 &mdash; 541.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:38 &mdash; 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:13 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:36 &mdash; 445, 447.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:8-28 &mdash; 1009.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:12 &mdash; 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:19 &mdash; 959.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:19 &mdash; 960.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:20 &mdash; 210.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:22 &mdash; 355.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:31 &mdash; 457.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:31, 32 &mdash; 774, 831.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:31, 40 &mdash; 458.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:37 &mdash; 720.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:42 &mdash; 695, 936.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:43 &mdash; 445, 453.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:44 &mdash; 675.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:15 &mdash; 760.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:34 &mdash; 325, 462, 463, 649, 677, 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:38 &mdash; 228.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:42 &mdash; 833.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:43 &mdash; 821, 994, 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:43-46 &mdash; 998, 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:46 &mdash; 311, 746.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:25 &mdash; 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:26 &mdash; 646, 764.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:27 &mdash; 114, 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:33 &mdash; 905.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:36 &mdash; 1018.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:39 &mdash; 131, 674, 691.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1 &mdash; 2, 151, 305, 309, 335, 336, 337, 378, 388.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1, 2 &mdash; 326.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1-4 &mdash; 109.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1-18 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 275, 310, 326.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3, 4 &mdash; 311</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:4 &mdash; 309, 584, 694.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:4, 9 &mdash; 715.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5 &mdash; 603.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9 &mdash; 68, 109, 134, 197, 571, 603, 666, 681, 744.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12 &mdash; 475, 839, 935.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12, 13 &mdash; 474, 793, 825, 842.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:13 &mdash; 495, 598, 642, 782, 811, 819.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:14 &mdash; 109, 160, 234, 322, 341, 673, 684, 686, 687.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:15 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16 &mdash; 256, 804, 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:17 &mdash; 262, 548.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:18 &mdash; 14, 246, 306, 322, 326, 337, 338, 341, 349.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19 &mdash; 109.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23 &mdash; 938.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:25 &mdash; 931.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:26 &mdash; 935.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:29 &mdash; 206, 554, 646, 647, 719, 728, 744, 757.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:31 &mdash; 935, 943.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:33 &mdash; 935.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:41 &mdash; 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:42, 43 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:47-50 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:50 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:2 &mdash; 685, 771.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7-10 &mdash; 465.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11, 24, 25 &mdash; 696.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:19 &mdash; 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:19, 21 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:21 &mdash; 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:23, 24 &mdash; 837.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:24 &mdash; 838.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:24, 25 &mdash; 310, 682.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2 &mdash; 837.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:3 &mdash; 36, 810, 818, 887.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:3-5 &mdash; 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:5 &mdash; 642, 811, 821, 822, 887, 945.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:5, 6, 10-13 &mdash; 842.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:6 &mdash; 495, 496, 578, 599, 661, 687.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:7 &mdash; 677, 810, 814.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:7, 14 &mdash; 729.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:8 &mdash; 258, 287, 316, 324, 338, 340, 782, 810, 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:11 &mdash; 684.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:12 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:13 &mdash; 681, 686.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:14 &mdash; 751, 760.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:14, 15 &mdash; 733.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16 &mdash; 245, 264, 289, 856, 935.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18 &mdash; 645.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18, 19 &mdash; 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18-20 &mdash; 841.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18-36 &mdash; 574, 645.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:21 &mdash; 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:23 &mdash; 935.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:33 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:34 &mdash; 696.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:36 &mdash; 645, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:1 &mdash; 32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:1, 2 &mdash; 932.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:6 &mdash; 314, 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:9 &mdash; 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:10 &mdash; 289.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:14 &mdash; 839.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:17-19, 39 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:21 &mdash; 280, 893.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:24 &mdash; 250, 305, 338, 540, 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:29 &mdash; 176.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:38 &mdash; 827.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:39 &mdash; 711.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:48 &mdash; 117.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:3, 4 &mdash; 239.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14 &mdash; 837.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:17 &mdash; 253, 259, 412, 419, 426.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:17, 19 &mdash; 333.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:18 &mdash; 313.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:19 &mdash; 302.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:20-29 &mdash; 1024.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:21 &mdash; 680, 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:22 &mdash; 333.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:23 &mdash; 311.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:24 &mdash; 659, 811, 842, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:26 &mdash; 245, 251, 309.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:27 &mdash; 678, 682.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:27-29 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:28 &mdash; 350.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:28, 29 &mdash; 1005, 1011, 1017.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:28-30 &mdash; 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:29 &mdash; 1042.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:30 &mdash; 302, 572, 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:32-37 &mdash; 322.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:35 &mdash; 837.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:39 &mdash; 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:39, 40 &mdash; 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:40 &mdash; 841.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:42 &mdash; 639.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:44 &mdash; 259.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:46 &mdash; 239, 314.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:14 &mdash; 711.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:19 &mdash; 210.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:20 &mdash; 846.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:27 &mdash; 293, 305.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:32 &mdash; 206.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:37 &mdash; 781, 839.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:41, 51 &mdash; 686.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1148'/><anchor id='Pg1148'/>

<lg>
<l>6:44 &mdash; 78, 642.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:44, 65 &mdash; 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:47, 52, 63 &mdash; 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:50 &mdash; 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:53 &mdash; 839.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:53, 56, 57 &mdash; 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:54, 58 &mdash; 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:55 &mdash; 297.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:62 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:64 &mdash; 315.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:65 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:69 &mdash; 309.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:17 &mdash; 4, 20, 584, 825, 841.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:18 &mdash; 552, 572.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:39 &mdash; 317.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:53 &mdash; 638.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:1-11 &mdash; 239, 638.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:7 &mdash; 925.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:9 &mdash; 638.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:12 &mdash; 838.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:29 &mdash; 269.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:30, 31 &mdash; 837.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:31-36 &mdash; 509.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:34 &mdash; 553, 642.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:35 &mdash; 475.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:36 &mdash; 509, 828.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:40 &mdash; 673.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:41-44 &mdash; 475.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:44 &mdash; 450, 583, 657.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:46 &mdash; 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:51 &mdash; 659, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:57 &mdash; 348, 678.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:58 &mdash; 163, 310, 326, 681, 695.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:2, 3 &mdash; 630.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:3 &mdash; 645.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:30 &mdash; 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:3 &mdash; 364.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:7 &mdash; 34.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:7-9 &mdash; 802.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:10 &mdash; 824.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:11 &mdash; 720.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:16 &mdash; 842, 843, 914.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:17, 18 &mdash; 703.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:18 &mdash; 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:28 &mdash; 781, 801.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:30 &mdash; 313, 695.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:34-36 &mdash; 307, 515.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:35 &mdash; 199.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:36 &mdash; 234, 322, 669.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:41 &mdash; 131, 156.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:11 &mdash; 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:11-14 &mdash; 994.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:14 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:25 &mdash; 842.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:26 &mdash; 660, 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:33, 35 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:35 &mdash; 738.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:35, 43 &mdash; 130.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:36 &mdash; 264.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:43 &mdash; 822.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:49-52 &mdash; 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:51, 52 &mdash; 843.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:24 &mdash; 680.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:27 &mdash; 483, 731, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:31 &mdash; 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:32 &mdash; 311, 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:32, 33 &mdash; 835.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:33 &mdash; 315, 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:41 &mdash; 309.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:44 &mdash; 350.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:47 &mdash; 241, 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:1 &mdash; 315.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:7 &mdash; 35.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:8 &mdash; 571, 733.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:10 &mdash; 831.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:21 &mdash; 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:27 &mdash; 424, 455, 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:29 &mdash; 901.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:33 &mdash; 680.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:1 &mdash; 838.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:1-3 &mdash; 991.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:3 &mdash; 659, 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:3-18 &mdash; 1003.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:6 &mdash; 28, 251, 260, 309, 802.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:9 &mdash; 14, 313, 333, 349, 699, 845.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:9, 10 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:10, 23 &mdash; 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:11 &mdash; 117, 833.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:12 &mdash; 120.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:14 &mdash; 311.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:16 &mdash; 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:16, 17 &mdash; 323, 339.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:16-18 &mdash; 323.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:17 &mdash; 288, 604, 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:18 &mdash; 323, 333, 680.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:20 &mdash; 759, 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:21 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:26 &mdash; 207, 323, 744.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:28 &mdash; 314, 342.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:30 &mdash; 448, 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:1 &mdash; 516, 680, 796.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:3 &mdash; 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:4, 5 &mdash; 642.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:4-6 &mdash; 110.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:5 &mdash; 331, 898.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:6 &mdash; 474, 475.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:7 &mdash; 438.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:9 &mdash; 778.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:10 &mdash; 331.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:15 &mdash; 21, 440, 737.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:16 &mdash; 598, 779, 784, 787.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:26 &mdash; 323, 333, 341.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:26, 27 &mdash; 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:2 &mdash; 192.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:7 &mdash; 323, 604, 697.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:8 &mdash; 316, 324, 339, 454, 856.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:8, 9 &mdash; 841.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:8-11 &mdash; 338.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:9 &mdash; 350.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:10 &mdash; 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:11 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:12 &mdash; 35.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:12, 13 &mdash; 164.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:12, 26 &mdash; 901.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:13 &mdash; 31, 134, 137, 206, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:13, 14 &mdash; 316.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:14 &mdash; 134, 323, 324, 326.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:14, 15 &mdash; 317.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:15 &mdash; 313, 349.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:18 &mdash; 242.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:26 &mdash; 698.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:28, 30 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:2 &mdash; 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:3 &mdash; 3, 67, 259, 260, 261, 691.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:4 &mdash; 324, 746.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:4, 5 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:5 &mdash; 256, 309, 314, 326, 378, 698, 699, 703.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:6 &mdash; 787.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:8 &mdash; 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:9 &mdash; 774, 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:9, 20, 24 &mdash; 771.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:10 &mdash; 313.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:11 &mdash; 272, 313.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:12 &mdash; 430, 475.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:19 &mdash; 674, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:21-23 &mdash; 798.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:22 &mdash; 313.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:22, 23 &mdash; 301.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:23 &mdash; 245, 684.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:24 &mdash; 263, 310, 326, 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:25 &mdash; 274.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:4 &mdash; 682.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:8, 9 &mdash; 430.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:11 &mdash; 743.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:32 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:36 &mdash; 889.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:36, 37 &mdash; 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:37 &mdash; 262, 633.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:38 &mdash; 156.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:11 &mdash; 648, 649.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:19 &mdash; 228.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:28 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:30 &mdash; 733, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:30, 34 &mdash; 675.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:38 &mdash; 959.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:17 &mdash; 680, 681, 707, 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:22 &mdash; 709, 935.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:26 &mdash; 410.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:27 &mdash; 691, 1018.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:28 &mdash; 306, 311.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1149'/><anchor id='Pg1149'/>

<lg>
<l>20:31 &mdash; 839.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:6 &mdash; 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:17 &mdash; 833.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:19 &mdash; 315, 355, 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acts.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1 &mdash; 150, 164.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:2 &mdash; 315, 316, 410, 696, 703.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7 &mdash; 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:10 &mdash; 453.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:11 &mdash; 1004.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:15, 23, 26 &mdash; 906.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23-26 &mdash; 894.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:24 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:25 &mdash; 660, 1049.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2: &mdash; 896, 901.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:2 &mdash; 287.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:4 &mdash; 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:22 &mdash; 117, 673.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:23 &mdash; 258, 282, 355, 675.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:24, 31 &mdash; 707.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:31 &mdash; 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:33 &mdash; 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:37, 38 &mdash; 945, 949.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:38 &mdash; 821, 822, 833, 931, 946, 948, 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:41 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:42 &mdash; 946, 959, 960.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:46 &mdash; 959, 960.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:47 &mdash; 895, 897, 901.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:13, 26 &mdash; 697.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18 &mdash; 646.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:22 &mdash; 137, 711.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:26 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:12 &mdash; 573, 842, 843.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:27, 28 &mdash; 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:27, 30 &mdash; 697.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:31 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:32 &mdash; 799.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:3 &mdash; 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:3, 4 &mdash; 315, 458.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:3, 4, 9 &mdash; 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:4 &mdash; 894.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:6 &mdash; 918.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:7-11 &mdash; 585.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:9 &mdash; 927.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:11 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14 &mdash; 897, 901.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:29 &mdash; 898.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:31 &mdash; 782, 835.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:36 &mdash; 228.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:1-4 &mdash; 918.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:1-6 &mdash; 917.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:2 &mdash; 891.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:3, 5 &mdash; 906.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:5 &mdash; 891.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:5, 6 &mdash; 894, 919.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:8-20 &mdash; 917.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:2 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:6 &mdash; 127.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:16 &mdash; 226.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:22 &mdash; 169, 994, 995.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:28 &mdash; 1004.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:38 &mdash; 891.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:39, 53 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:42 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:51 &mdash; 32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:53 &mdash; 452.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:55 &mdash; 708.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:59 &mdash; 311, 991, 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:60 &mdash; 595, 659.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:4 &mdash; 899.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:12 &mdash; 821, 945.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:13 &mdash; 837.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:16 &mdash; 948, 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:25 &mdash; 27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:26 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:29 &mdash; 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:38, 39 &mdash; 935, 936.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:5 &mdash; 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:15 &mdash; 779.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:15, 16 &mdash; 787.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:31 &mdash; 891, 892, 912.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:19, 20 &mdash; 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:31-44 &mdash; 843.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:34, 35 &mdash; 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:35 &mdash; 574, 853.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:38 &mdash; 315, 316, 325, 455, 696, 700, 703.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:42 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:43 &mdash; 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:48 &mdash; 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:18 &mdash; 782, 835.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:21 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:24 &mdash; 901.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:28 &mdash; 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:7 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:15 &mdash; 452.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:23 &mdash; 452.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:2 &mdash; 324, 907.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:2, 3 &mdash; 906, 909, 919.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:33, 34, 35 &mdash; 340, 341.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:38, 39 &mdash; 855.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:39 &mdash; 793, 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:48 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:48, 49 &mdash; 27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14: &mdash; 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:15 &mdash; 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:16 &mdash; 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:16, 17 &mdash; 666.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:17 &mdash; 26, 32, 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:23 &mdash; 890, 906, 919.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:27 &mdash; 891, 906.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:1-35 &mdash; 912.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:2, 4, 22, 30 &mdash; 906.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:6-11 &mdash; 215.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:7-30 &mdash; 909.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:8 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:8, 9 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:9 &mdash; 770.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:18 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:23 &mdash; 906.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:28 &mdash; 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:6, 7 &mdash; 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:14 &mdash; 810, 819, 825.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:15 &mdash; 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:16 &mdash; 456.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:31 &mdash; 843.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:33 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:33, 34, 40 &mdash; 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17: &mdash; 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:3 &mdash; 110, 760, 764.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:4 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:18 &mdash; 842.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:21-26 &mdash; 494.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:22 &mdash; 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:23 &mdash; 27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:25-27 &mdash; 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:26 &mdash; 115, 355, 421, 476, 691, 692.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:27 &mdash; 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:27, 28 &mdash; 105, 280, 571.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:28 &mdash; 254, 412, 474, 503, 715, 798.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:29 &mdash; 759.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:30 &mdash; 573, 649, 652.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:31 &mdash; 333, 405.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:8 &mdash; 945.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:9, 10 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:10 &mdash; 789.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:14 &mdash; 152.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:26 &mdash; 547.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:27 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:1-5 &mdash; 950.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:4 &mdash; 836, 901, 932, 945.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:5 &mdash; 948.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:10, 20 &mdash; 27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:21 &mdash; 910.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:32, 39 &mdash; 981.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:7 &mdash; 410, 894, 960.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:17 &mdash; 914.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:20, 21 &mdash; 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:21 &mdash; 836.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:28 &mdash; 137, 894, 914.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:28-31 &mdash; 915.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:31 &mdash; 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:35 &mdash; 265, 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:9 &mdash; 547.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:10 &mdash; 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:31-33 &mdash; 240.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:16 &mdash; 946.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:26-29 &mdash; 240.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:5 &mdash; 242.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:6 &mdash; 995, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23:26-30 &mdash; 240.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:15 &mdash; 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:25 &mdash; 988, 1024.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1150'/><anchor id='Pg1150'/>

<lg>
<l>26:6-8 &mdash; 995.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:7, 8 &mdash; 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:9 &mdash; 500.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:23 &mdash; 646.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>26:24, 25 &mdash; 31.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:10 &mdash; 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:21-26 &mdash; 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:22-24 &mdash; 364.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>27:24 &mdash; 789.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romans.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 684.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3, 4 &mdash; 340.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:4 &mdash; 129, 676, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5 &mdash; 847.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7 &mdash; 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:13 &mdash; 495.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16 &mdash; 746.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:17 &mdash; 847, 849.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:17-20 &mdash; 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:18 &mdash; 266, 644, 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19 &mdash; 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19-21, 28, 32 &mdash; 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19-25 &mdash; 319.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:20 &mdash; 26, 32, 68, 69, 1044, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:24 &mdash; 633.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:24, 28 &mdash; 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:25 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:28 &mdash; 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:32 &mdash; 26, 649, 832.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:4 &mdash; 113, 289, 571, 776, 833.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:5 &mdash; 981.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:5-6 &mdash; 662, 1025.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6 &mdash; 290, 648.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6-11 &mdash; 778.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 917.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:12 &mdash; 558, 649.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14 &mdash; 574, 638.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14, 15 &mdash; 541.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14, 19 &mdash; 538.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:15 &mdash; 26, 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:26 &mdash; 617, 852.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1, 2 &mdash; 779.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2 &mdash; 838.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:4 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:9 &mdash; 574, 639.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:10-12 &mdash; 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:11 &mdash; 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:12 &mdash; 115.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:15 &mdash; 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:19 &mdash; 645.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:19, 20, 23 &mdash; 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:20 &mdash; 543, 832.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:22 &mdash; 772.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:23 &mdash; 542, 610.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:24-26 &mdash; 855.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:25 &mdash; 772.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:24-30 &mdash; 849.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:25 &mdash; 112, 405, 423, 714.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:25, 26 &mdash; 718, 719, 753.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:26 &mdash; 298, 846.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:28 &mdash; 847, 1001.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:31 &mdash; 548.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4-16 &mdash; 847.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:5 &mdash; 842, 854.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:6, 8 &mdash; 851.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:17 &mdash; 287, 376, 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:20, 21 &mdash; 844.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:24,25 &mdash; 15, 657.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:25 &mdash; 717, 763, 852.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1 &mdash; 854.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1-2 &mdash; 856.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:5 &mdash; 848.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:6-8 &mdash; 720.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:8 &mdash; 290, 726.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:10 &mdash; 544, 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:11 &mdash; 856.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:12 &mdash; 39, 210, 490, 495, 593, 604, 609, 610, 613, 614, 620, 658.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:12-14 &mdash; 579.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:12-17 &mdash; 657.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:12-19 &mdash; 15, 476, 477, 603, 625.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:12-21 &mdash; 622, 660, 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:13 &mdash; 594.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14 &mdash; 661, 662, 686.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14, 18, 21 &mdash; 660.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:15 &mdash; 673.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:16 &mdash; 593.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:16-18 &mdash; 619, 852.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:19 &mdash; 593, 614, 718.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:20 &mdash; 543.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:21 &mdash; 553, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:3 &mdash; 940, 941, 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:3-5 &mdash; 931.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:3-6 &mdash; 932.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:4 &mdash; 936, 941.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:5 &mdash; 796, 941.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:6 &mdash; 824.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:7 &mdash; 851.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:7, 8 &mdash; 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:7-10 &mdash; 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:9, 10 &mdash; 657.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:11 &mdash; 797, 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:12 &mdash; 553.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:13 &mdash; 810, 945.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:13, 18 &mdash; 853.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:15-23 &mdash; 509.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:17 &mdash; 31, 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:19 &mdash; 633, 1049.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:23 &mdash; 293, 645, 657.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:4 &mdash; 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:7, 8 &mdash; 544.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:8, 9, 10 &mdash; 553.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:10-11 &mdash; 941.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:11, 13, 14, 17, 20 &mdash; 553.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:14 &mdash; 540.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:15 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:17 &mdash; 552.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:18 &mdash; 562, 639, 642, 687.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:23 &mdash; 581, 639, 646.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:24 &mdash; 555, 578, 642, 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:1 &mdash; 646, 647, 659.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:1-2 &mdash; 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:1-17 &mdash; 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:2 &mdash; 316, 548, 590, 804, 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:3 &mdash; 341, 677, 706, 714, 718, 762, 943.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:3, 10, 11 &mdash; 657.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:4 &mdash; 548.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:7 &mdash; 562, 571, 573, 580, 639, 818, 831.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:7, 8 &mdash; 645.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:9, 10 &mdash; 797, 801.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:10 &mdash; 805, 852, 983, 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:11 &mdash; 316, 324, 339, 488, 806, 1017.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:13 &mdash; 659, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:14 &mdash; 339, 441, 830.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:14, 15 &mdash; 474.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:16 &mdash; 502, 839, 844.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:18-23 &mdash; 1018.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:19 &mdash; 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:20, 21 &mdash; 402, 403.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:20-23 &mdash; 658.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:21-23 &mdash; 1004.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:23 &mdash; 826, 1002, 1017, 1022.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:24 &mdash; 981.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:26 &mdash; 323, 324, 325, 338, 339, 439, 454, 798.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:26, 27 &mdash; 438, 774, 848.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:27 &mdash; 349.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:27-30 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:28 &mdash; 353, 368, 421, 443.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:28, 29, 30 &mdash; 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:30 &mdash; 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:31-39 &mdash; 788.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:32 &mdash; 265, 266, 289, 341, 405.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:34 &mdash; 544, 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:35-39 &mdash; 801.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:38 &mdash; 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:39 &mdash; 278.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9: &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:1 &mdash; 502.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:5 &mdash; 306.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1151'/><anchor id='Pg1151'/>

<lg>
<l>9:11 &mdash; 661.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:11-16 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:16 &mdash; 784.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:17 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:17, 18 &mdash; 424.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:17, 22, 23 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:18 &mdash; 296.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:20 &mdash; 786.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:20, 21 &mdash; 779.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:21 &mdash; 784.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:22, 23 &mdash; 790.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:22-25 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:23 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:23, 24 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:28 &mdash; 827.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:3 &mdash; 852.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:4 &mdash; 544.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:6-7 &mdash; 280.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:6-8 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:7 &mdash; 707.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:9 &mdash; 309, 839.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:9, 10 &mdash; 889.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:9, 12 &mdash; 311.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:10 &mdash; 810, 948.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:2 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:5-7 &mdash; 778.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:8 &mdash; 152.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:13 &mdash; 254.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:16 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:18 &mdash; 848.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:25 &mdash; 668.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:25, 26 &mdash; 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:29 &mdash; 198, 782, 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:32 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:33 &mdash; 34, 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:36 &mdash; 275, 337.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:38 &mdash; 378.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:1 &mdash; 32, 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:2 &mdash; 40, 260.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:3 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:5 &mdash; 755.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:6-8 &mdash; 902.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:15 &mdash; 615.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:16 &mdash; 904.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:19 &mdash; 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:1 &mdash; 117, 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:5 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:8-10 &mdash; 572.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:10 &mdash; 302.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:4 &mdash; 899.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:7 &mdash; 572.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:8 &mdash; 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:14 &mdash; 241.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:17 &mdash; 853, 892.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:23 &mdash; 32, 553.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:2 &mdash; 265, 546, 568.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:3 &mdash; 572, 724.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:19 &mdash; 324, 325.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:20 &mdash; 910.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:26 &mdash; 894.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:30 &mdash; 263, 316, 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:31 &mdash; 841.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:1, 2 &mdash; 918.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:5 &mdash; 890.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:7 &mdash; 909.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:22 &mdash; 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:25, 26 &mdash; 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:26 &mdash; 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:23 &mdash; 662.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:4-10 &mdash; 1011.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1 Corinthians.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:2 &mdash; 201, 890, 892, 897.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:10 &mdash; 904.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16 &mdash; 210, 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16, 17 &mdash; 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:18 &mdash; 27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:21 &mdash; 4, 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23 &mdash; 842.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23, 24 &mdash; 746.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23, 24, 26 &mdash; 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:24-29 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:26 &mdash; 562.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:28 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:30 &mdash; 710, 781, 805, 806, 852.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:31 &mdash; 152.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:4 &mdash; 325.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 275, 356.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7-16 &mdash; 250.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:9 &mdash; 36, 289.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:9-13 &mdash; 206.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 253, 316.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10-12 &mdash; 13, 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11 &mdash; 253, 316, 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11, 12 &mdash; 40.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:13 &mdash; 19, 35.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14 &mdash; 4, 484, 642.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14, 16 &mdash; 203.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:28 &mdash; 917.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1, 2 &mdash; 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:6 &mdash; 574.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:6, 7 &mdash; 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:10 &mdash; 31, 338.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:10-15 &mdash; 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16 &mdash; 315, 316.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:21 &mdash; 40.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:21, 23 &mdash; 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:22 &mdash; 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4 &mdash; 851.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:5 &mdash; 310, 894.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:7 &mdash; 604, 786.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:13 &mdash; 894.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:15 &mdash; 418.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:17 &mdash; 890.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:3 &mdash; 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:3-5 &mdash; 200, 924.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:4, 5 &mdash; 907.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:5 &mdash; 457.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:9 &mdash; 145, 150.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:13 &mdash; 907, 924, 925.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:21 &mdash; 646, 747.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:37, 38 &mdash; 426.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:3 &mdash; 445, 446.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:11 &mdash; 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:13-20 &mdash; 1017.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:15, 19 &mdash; 796.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:17 &mdash; 798.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:19 &mdash; 315, 488.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:20 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:10, 12 &mdash; 242.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:14 &mdash; 597, 609, 661, 951, 952.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:17 &mdash; 201, 806.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:23 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:40 &mdash; 242.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:3 &mdash; 520, 780, 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:4 &mdash; 259, 446, 457.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:6 &mdash; 15, 310, 378, 419, 700.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:12 &mdash; 501.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:16 &mdash; 919, 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:1-2 &mdash; 936.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:2 &mdash; 941.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:3, 4 &mdash; 942.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:8 &mdash; 227.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:11 &mdash; 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:12 &mdash; 948.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:13 &mdash; 425, 458.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:16, 17 &mdash; 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:20 &mdash; 457.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:31 &mdash; 401.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:33 &mdash; 892.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:2 &mdash; 906.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:3 &mdash; 342, 515, 680.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:5 &mdash; 547.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:7 &mdash; 515.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:8 &mdash; 494.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:10 &mdash; 452.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:11, 12 &mdash; 525.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:16 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:23 &mdash; 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:23, 24 &mdash; 906.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:23-25 &mdash; 959.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:23-26 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:24 &mdash; 959.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:24-25 &mdash; 311.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:26 &mdash; 546, 933, 959.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:27 &mdash; 960.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:29 &mdash; 952, 960.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:30 &mdash; 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:3 &mdash; 309, 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:4, 6 &mdash; 315.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:4, 8, 11 &mdash; 325.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:6 &mdash; 418.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:8-11 &mdash; 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:9 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:11 &mdash; 316.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:12 &mdash; 796, 893.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1152'/><anchor id='Pg1152'/>

<lg>
<l>12:13 &mdash; 942.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:28 &mdash; 401, 710, 891, 902, 912, 917.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13: &mdash; 35.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:4 &mdash; 325.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:10 &mdash; 981.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:12 &mdash; 8, 35, 143, 219.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:13 &mdash; 848.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:23 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:25 &mdash; 546.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:37 &mdash; 901.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:37, 38 &mdash; 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:40 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:3, 4 &mdash; 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:6 &mdash; 906.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:8 &mdash; 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:12 &mdash; 942.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:20, 23 &mdash; 680, 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:21 &mdash; 673.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:21, 22 &mdash; 476, 657.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:22 &mdash; 495, 593, 603, 622, 942, 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:22, 45 &mdash; 686.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:22, 45, 49 &mdash; 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:24 &mdash; 893.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:25 &mdash; 356, 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:26 &mdash; 590.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:28 &mdash; 314, 397, 698, 699.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:32 &mdash; 989.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:34 &mdash; 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:37, 38 &mdash; 1019.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:38, 40 &mdash; 563.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:40 &mdash; 806.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:40, 45 &mdash; 678.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:41 &mdash; 898.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:42, 50 &mdash; 658.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:44 &mdash; 484, 488, 1016.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:45 &mdash; 316, 333, 527, 697, 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:45, 46 &mdash; 802, 991.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:46 &mdash; 524.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:51 &mdash; 658, 1005.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:53, 54 &mdash; 1018.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:54-57 &mdash; 659.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:55 &mdash; 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:1, 2 &mdash; 894.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:15 &mdash; 780, 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:22 &mdash; 329, 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 Corinthians.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:20 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:24 &mdash; 205.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6, 7 &mdash; 907.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6-8 &mdash; 925.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11 &mdash; 464.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14 &mdash; 431.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14-17 &mdash; 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:15, 16 &mdash; 789.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:16 &mdash; 1002.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:5 &mdash; 643.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:6 &mdash; 35, 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:15, 16 &mdash; 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:17, 18 &mdash; 326, 333, 697.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18 &mdash; 219, 315, 663, 678.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:2 &mdash; 822.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4 &mdash; 517, 518, 827.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:6 &mdash; 286, 336, 337.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:7 &mdash; 213.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:17 &mdash; 256, 402.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1-8 &mdash; 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1-9 &mdash; 659.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:3, 4 &mdash; 1002.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:4 &mdash; 235.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:8 &mdash; 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:10 &mdash; 1011, 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:11 &mdash; 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:13 &mdash; 31.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14 &mdash; 622, 623, 805, 941.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14, 15 &mdash; 766.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:15 &mdash; 572, 662, 716.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:17 &mdash; 793, 797, 804, 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:18, 19 &mdash; 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:19 &mdash; 333, 686, 699, 714, 718, 768.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:21 &mdash; 645, 677, 718, 731, 743, 760.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:21 &mdash; 718, 731, 743, 805, 853, 856, 943.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:17 &mdash; 474.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:1 &mdash; 268, 639, 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:9, 10 &mdash; 832.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:10 &mdash; 836.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:11 &mdash; 294, 907.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:5 &mdash; 899.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:6 &mdash; 334.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:9 &mdash; 703.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:19 &mdash; 705, 906.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:9 &mdash; 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:15 &mdash; 754.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:5 &mdash; 543.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:16 &mdash; 910.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:1 &mdash; 210.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:2 &mdash; 796.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:14 &mdash; 450.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:2 &mdash; 991.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:4 &mdash; 35, 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:7 &mdash; 438, 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:8, 9 &mdash; 848.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:9 &mdash; 687.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:10 &mdash; 10, 317.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:4 &mdash; 708.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:11 &mdash; 904.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:12 &mdash; 201.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:14 &mdash; 306, 324, 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galatians.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:2 &mdash; 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:4 &mdash; 716, 718.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7 &mdash; 475.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12 &mdash; 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:15, 16 &mdash; 421, 782, 804, 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16 &mdash; 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:22 &mdash; 892.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 838.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 715.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11 &mdash; 215, 909.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:15 &mdash; 578.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:16-20 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:19-20 &mdash; 941.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:20 &mdash; 514, 572, 643, 797, 801, 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:21 &mdash; 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:6 &mdash; 856.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:7 &mdash; 836.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:10 &mdash; 152.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:11 &mdash; 849.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:11-13 &mdash; 242.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:13 &mdash; 430, 657, 718, 728.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:17 &mdash; 227.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:19 &mdash; 448, 452, 453.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:22 &mdash; 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:24 &mdash; 544.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:26 &mdash; 334, 474, 842.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:26, 27 &mdash; 946.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:27 &mdash; 797, 941, 948, 951.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:1-7 &mdash; 475.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:3 &mdash; 665.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4 &mdash; 258, 322, 341, 388, 665.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4, 5 &mdash; 761.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:5 &mdash; 338, 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:6 &mdash; 322, 323, 333, 334, 474.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:9 &mdash; 780, 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:19 &mdash; 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:25 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:28 &mdash; 577.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:6 &mdash; 770, 846, 847.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:11 &mdash; 746.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14 &mdash; 572.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:19 &mdash; 554.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:22 &mdash; 554, 782, 847.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:1 &mdash; 650.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:7, 8 &mdash; 1049.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:15 &mdash; 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ephesians.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1: &mdash; 355.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:2, 3 &mdash; 685.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 592.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23 &mdash; 697.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1153'/><anchor id='Pg1153'/>

<lg>
<l>1:4 &mdash; 275, 309, 388, 781, 782, 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:4-5 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:4-6 &mdash; 778, 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:4, 7 &mdash; 771.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5 &mdash; 334, 335.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5, 6 &mdash; 474.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5, 6, 9 &mdash; 397.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5-8 &mdash; 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6 &mdash; 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7 &mdash; 114, 849, 855.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9 &mdash; 253.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9-11 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:10 &mdash; 444, 450, 680.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:11 &mdash; 253, 287, 353, 355, 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:13 &mdash; 844.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:14 &mdash; 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:17-18 &mdash; 823.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:18 &mdash; 4, 69, 825, 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19 &mdash; 287.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19, 20 &mdash; 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:21, 22 &mdash; 699.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:22 &mdash; 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:22, 23 &mdash; 109, 685, 708, 796, 887, 888.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23 &mdash; 163, 310, 418.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:1 &mdash; 521, 643, 659, 810, 983, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:2 &mdash; 448, 451, 455, 642.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:3 &mdash; 459, 475, 495, 578, 579, 593, 603, 609, 645, 661, 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:5 &mdash; 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:5, 6 &mdash; 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6 &mdash; 890.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:8 &mdash; 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:8-10 &mdash; 643.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 355, 364, 423, 475, 521, 598, 782, 785, 804, 811, 819, 824, 826, 831.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:12 &mdash; 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:12, 16, 18, 19 &mdash; 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:13 &mdash; 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:15 &mdash; 545.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:16-18, 21, 22 &mdash; 685.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:18 &mdash; 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:20 &mdash; 710, 909.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:20-22 &mdash; 795.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:28 &mdash; 338.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1 &mdash; 431.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:5 &mdash; 710.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:9 &mdash; 27, 113, 378.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:10 &mdash; 282, 446, 450, 460, 713, 887, 1052.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:10, 11 &mdash; 356.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:11 &mdash; 353.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:12 &mdash; 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:14, 15 &mdash; 334, 448, 474, 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16, 17 &mdash; 801.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:17 &mdash; 797, 804, 839.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18 &mdash; 905.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:19 &mdash; 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:20 &mdash; 287.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:3 &mdash; 904.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:5 &mdash; 758, 941.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:5, 6 &mdash; 259.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:6 &mdash; 102, 333.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:7-8 &mdash; 309.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:8 &mdash; 340.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:10 &mdash; 685, 708.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:11 &mdash; 19, 745, 902, 915.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:15, 16 &mdash; 796.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:18 &mdash; 639, 820.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:18, 19 &mdash; 647.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:20 &mdash; 261.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:22 &mdash; 824.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:22-24 &mdash; 639.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:23 &mdash; 484, 633.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:23, 24 &mdash; 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:24 &mdash; 514, 517.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:26 &mdash; 234, 294, 743.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:30 &mdash; 266, 316, 324, 325.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:32 &mdash; 314.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1 &mdash; 543.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:2 &mdash; 719, 736.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:9 &mdash; 31.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:10 &mdash; 32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14 &mdash; 659, 810, 829, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:18 &mdash; 464.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:21 &mdash; 311.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:23 &mdash; 680.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:24, 25 &mdash; 887.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:25, 27 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:26 &mdash; 946.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:27 &mdash; 739.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:29 &mdash; 1022.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:29, 30 &mdash; 800.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:31 &mdash; 706.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:31, 32 &mdash; 796.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:32 &mdash; 801.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:11 &mdash; 458.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:12 &mdash; 382, 445, 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:16 &mdash; 458.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:17 &mdash; 17, 32, 220, 811, 815, 819.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:23 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippians.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1 &mdash; 894, 902, 914.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6 &mdash; 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9 &mdash; 265, 297, 440.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19 &mdash; 333.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:21, 23 &mdash; 659.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23 &mdash; 731, 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:27 &mdash; 904.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:5 &mdash; 806.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6 &mdash; 308, 313, 314, 326, 336, 703, 718.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6, 7 &mdash; 249, 703.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6-11 &mdash; 702, 706.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 314, 572, 689, 943.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7, 8 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 314.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10, 11 &mdash; 311.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:12 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:12, 13 &mdash; 258, 356, 364, 418, 641, 715, 785, 792, 799, 811, 830.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:13 &mdash; 423, 782, 816.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:16 &mdash; 33.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:30 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:6 &mdash; 891, 912.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:8 &mdash; 706.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:8, 9 &mdash; 544, 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:8, 10 &mdash; 691.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:9 &mdash; 856.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:11 &mdash; 1002.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:14 &mdash; 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:15 &mdash; 574.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:20, 21 &mdash; 806.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:21 &mdash; 678, 1015, 1017.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:3 &mdash; 547, 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:5 &mdash; 236, 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:13 &mdash; 512.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:19 &mdash; 421.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colossians.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9, 10 &mdash; 440.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:13 &mdash; 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:15 &mdash; 313, 336, 340, 341, 515.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:15, 17 &mdash; 326.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16 &mdash; 16, 310, 326, 378, 382, 397, 444, 445, 448, 474, 475, 679.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16, 17 &mdash; 109, 377, 464.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:17 &mdash; 110, 310, 311, 378, 412, 759.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:18 &mdash; 150, 678, 680, 887.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19 &mdash; 313.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:20 &mdash; 109, 310, 388, 450, 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:22 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23 &mdash; 1008.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1154'/><anchor id='Pg1154'/>

<lg>
<l>1:24 &mdash; 716.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:27 &mdash; 19, 691, 801, 842.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:28 &mdash; 260.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:2 &mdash; 691.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:2, 3 &mdash; 109.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:3 &mdash; 28, 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:5 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 795.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:9 &mdash; 109, 308, 313, 348, 680, 686, 692.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:9, 10 &mdash; 32, 253.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 444.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11, 12 &mdash; 931.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:12 &mdash; 821, 822, 936, 940, 941.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:15 &mdash; 442, 459.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:18 &mdash; 446, 452, 453.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:20, 21, 22 &mdash; 217.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:21 &mdash; 216.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2 &mdash; 941.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:3 &mdash; 829.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:3, 4 &mdash; 810.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:10 &mdash; 514, 517.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:11 &mdash; 546.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:12 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:16 &mdash; 201.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1 Thessalonians.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1, 2 &mdash; 848.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6 &mdash; 294.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9 &mdash; 251.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 294.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:12 &mdash; 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14 &mdash; 890.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:18 &mdash; 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:5 &mdash; 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:13 &mdash; 268, 303.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:2, 8 &mdash; 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:7 &mdash; 268.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:13-17 &mdash; 1017.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:14 &mdash; 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:14-16 &mdash; 1015.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:16 &mdash; 1004, 1005.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:14, 17 &mdash; 801.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:15-17 &mdash; 137, 235.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:16 &mdash; 448, 998, 1004, 1005.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:17 &mdash; 1005.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:10 &mdash; 999, 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:11 &mdash; 899.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:12 &mdash; 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:12, 13 &mdash; 780, 902.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:22 &mdash; 732.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:23 &mdash; 484, 485, 806.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:24 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 Thessalonians.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5-10 &mdash; 778.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6-10 &mdash; 1011.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7, 10 &mdash; 1004.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9 &mdash; 660.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:1, 2 &mdash; 138, 140.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:1, 3 &mdash; 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:2 &mdash; 150, 1005.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:3 &mdash; 137, 138.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:3, 4 &mdash; 572.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:3, 4, 7, 8 &mdash; 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:3, 4, 9 &mdash; 454.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:3-5 &mdash; 236.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 425, 587.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:8 &mdash; 457.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:9 &mdash; 132, 133, 457.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 1024.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11, 12 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:13 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14 &mdash; 791.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:6 &mdash; 924, 925.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:11 &mdash; 140.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:14, 15 &mdash; 907.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1 Timothy.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 787.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:10 &mdash; 39.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:11 &mdash; 245.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12 &mdash; 919.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:13, 15, 16 &mdash; 649.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:15 &mdash; 556, 787.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16 &mdash; 787.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:17 &mdash; 259, 275, 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:20 &mdash; 457.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:4 &mdash; 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:5 &mdash; 308, 673, 685.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:5 &mdash; 308, 673, 685, 698.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6 &mdash; 717, 771.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11, 12 &mdash; 546.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:15 &mdash; 680.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1 &mdash; 914.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1, 2 &mdash; 902.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2 &mdash; 19, 39, 915.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2-7 &mdash; 919.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3: &mdash; 912.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:5 &mdash; 917.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:8 &mdash; 914.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:8-13 &mdash; 918.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:11 &mdash; 918.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:15 &mdash; 18, 33, 891, 903, 905, 977.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16 &mdash; 15, 686, 691, 718, 762, 843, 852, 856.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:2 &mdash; 501.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4 &mdash; 758.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:10 &mdash; 758, 771.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:14 &mdash; 919, 946.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:16 &mdash; 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:2 &mdash; 464.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:6 &mdash; 659.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:9 &mdash; 895.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:17 &mdash; 915, 917.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:21 &mdash; 447, 450, 452.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:22 &mdash; 919.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:24 &mdash; 650.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:4 &mdash; 39.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:13 &mdash; 412.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:15 &mdash; 259, 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:16 &mdash; 14, 246, 262, 275, 444.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:20 &mdash; 39, 149.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 Timothy.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9 &mdash; 771, 781, 791, 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:10 &mdash; 131, 590.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12 &mdash; 67, 149.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:13 &mdash; 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:14 &mdash; 149.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16-18 &mdash; 1043.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:18 &mdash; 318.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:3 &mdash; 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 789.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11 &mdash; 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:15 &mdash; 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:18 &mdash; 998, 1017.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:20 &mdash; 790.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:25 &mdash; 17, 451, 782, 835.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:26 &mdash; 445, 835.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2 &mdash; 572, 639.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:4 &mdash; 639.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:7 &mdash; 814.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:13 &mdash; 633, 638.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:15 &mdash; 218, 804.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16 &mdash; 197, 200, 205.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:2 &mdash; 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:6 &mdash; 236.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:8 &mdash; 1000, 1005.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:13 &mdash; 217.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:16 &mdash; 594.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:18 &mdash; 311, 998.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titus.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:2 &mdash; 288, 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5 &mdash; 906, 914.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6 &mdash; 919.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7 &mdash; 914.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9 &mdash; 19, 919.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12 &mdash; 165, 696.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:15 &mdash; 639.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 333.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11 &mdash; 758, 771.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:13 &mdash; 307.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:4 &mdash; 289.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1155'/><anchor id='Pg1155'/>

<lg>
<l>3:5 &mdash; 316, 821, 822, 946.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrews.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1 &mdash; 214, 221.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:2 &mdash; 160, 320, 326, 333, 378.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:2, 3 &mdash; 109, 412, 685.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 165, 256, 286, 310, 313, 320, 336, 419, 515, 762, 775.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5, 6 &mdash; 340.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6 &mdash; 307, 311, 1004.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7 &mdash; 457.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:8 &mdash; 307, 318, 598, 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9 &mdash; 266.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:10 &mdash; 310, 326.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:11 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:14 &mdash; 445, 452, 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:2 &mdash; 448, 452.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:2, 3 &mdash; 648.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:3 &mdash; 153.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:4 &mdash; 845.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6 &mdash; 653.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6-10 &mdash; 678.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 315, 706.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:8, 9 &mdash; 405, 775.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:9 &mdash; 716, 743.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 675, 745.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11 &mdash; 476, 680, 692.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:12 &mdash; 891.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:13 &mdash; 697.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14 &mdash; 455, 459, 670, 685.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14, 15 &mdash; 757.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:16 &mdash; 448, 453, 455, 464, 476, 687, 768, 786.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:17 &mdash; 720.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:17, 18 &mdash; 698, 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:18 &mdash; 675.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1 &mdash; 791, 909.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:3, 4 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:12 &mdash; 553, 639.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:13 &mdash; 899.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:14, 16 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18 &mdash; 841.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:4 &mdash; 153.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:6, 11 &mdash; 841.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:5-9 &mdash; 410.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:12 &mdash; 484, 485, 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:13 &mdash; 282.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:15 &mdash; 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:15, 16 &mdash; 698, 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:7 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:8 &mdash; 675.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14 &mdash; 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:1, 2 &mdash; 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:2 &mdash; 1053.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:10 &mdash; 399.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:11 &mdash; 844.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:18 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:18, 19 &mdash; 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:10 &mdash; 494.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:15, 16 &mdash; 680, 694, 846.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:16 &mdash; 309.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:23, 25 &mdash; 773.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:24, 25 &mdash; 698.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:25 &mdash; 639, 698, 774, 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:26 &mdash; 309, 646, 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:2 &mdash; 260.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:5 &mdash; 152, 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:8, 9 &mdash; 614.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:13 &mdash; 152.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:1 &mdash; 852.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:11, 12 &mdash; 718.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:13, 14 &mdash; 724.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:14 &mdash; 298, 415, 316, 317, 326, 338, 341, 378, 677, 696, 703, 736, 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:14, 22, 25 &mdash; 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:15 &mdash; 718.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:22 &mdash; 645, 765.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:26 &mdash; 943, 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:27 &mdash; 1001, 1024.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:27, 28 &mdash; 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:28 &mdash; 718, 1001, 1004.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:5-7 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:7 &mdash; 830.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:9 &mdash; 539.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:12 &mdash; 936.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:19-25 &mdash; 848.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:22 &mdash; 501, 946.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:25 &mdash; 894, 899.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:26, 29. &mdash; 350.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:27 &mdash; 1052.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:28 &mdash; 650.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:31 &mdash; 539, 652, 660, 1056.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:38 &mdash; 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:1 &mdash; 839.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:2 &mdash; 675.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:3 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:4 &mdash; 726.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:4-7 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:5 &mdash; 995, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:6 &mdash; 643.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:8 &mdash; 280, 441.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:12 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:13-16 &mdash; 995, 996.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:31 &mdash; 230, 841.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:34, 38 &mdash; 165.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:2 &mdash; 266.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:2, 16 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:6 &mdash; 272, 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:9 &mdash; 465, 474, 483, 491, 495.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:14 &mdash; 296.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:19 &mdash; 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:20 &mdash; 234.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:22, 23 &mdash; 446.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:23 &mdash; 333, 367, 483, 509, 887, 998, 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:29 &mdash; 268, 272, 653.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:7 &mdash; 915, 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:8 &mdash; 163, 309, 888, 1003.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:17 &mdash; 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:21 &mdash; 311.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:33 &mdash; 680.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5 &mdash; 265, 440.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:13, 14 &mdash; 562.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:14, 15 &mdash; 562.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:15 &mdash; 573, 585, 633, 981.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:17 &mdash; 256, 257, 359.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:18 &mdash; 782, 811, 889.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:21 &mdash; 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23, 24 &mdash; 543.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23-25 &mdash; 219, 681.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:27 &mdash; 24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:8 &mdash; 572.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:10 &mdash; 543.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:14-26 &mdash; 846.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:19 &mdash; 457, 837.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:21, 23, 24 &mdash; 851.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:23 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:25 &mdash; 230.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:26 &mdash; 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2 &mdash; 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:9 &mdash; 515.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:17 &mdash; 297, 911.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:7 &mdash; 458.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:12 &mdash; 543.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:13-15 &mdash; 423.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:17 &mdash; 542, 553, 648.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:7 &mdash; 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:8, 9 &mdash; 1007.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:9 &mdash; 236.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:11 &mdash; 241.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14 &mdash; 902.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:16 &mdash; 834.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:19, 20 &mdash; 850.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:20 &mdash; 660, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1 Peter.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1, 2 &mdash; 324, 450, 780, 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:2 &mdash; 305, 316, 324, 778, 782, 788.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 418, 811.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1156'/><anchor id='Pg1156'/>

<lg>
<l>1:5 &mdash; 848.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:10, 11 &mdash; 235.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:11 &mdash; 134, 137, 197, 206.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:11, 12 &mdash; 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12 &mdash; 445, 450.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16 &mdash; 290, 296, 302, 543.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:18 &mdash; 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19 &mdash; 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19, 20 &mdash; 266.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:20 &mdash; 780.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:23 &mdash; 33, 811, 824.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:4, 5 &mdash; 795.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:5 &mdash; 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:5, 9 &mdash; 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:8 &mdash; 355, 784, 790.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:9 &mdash; 401, 781, 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:17 &mdash; 515.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:21 &mdash; 678, 729, 732.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:21, 24 &mdash; 717.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:22 &mdash; 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1, 2 &mdash; 914.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:8 &mdash; 904.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:15 &mdash; 311, 739.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16 &mdash; 501.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18 &mdash; 685, 720, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18, 20 &mdash; 707, 708.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:19 &mdash; 999, 1000.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:21 &mdash; 501, 776, 821, 941.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:32 &mdash; 444.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:6 &mdash; 657, 762, 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:7 &mdash; 236, 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:11 &mdash; 401, 641.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:14 &mdash; 256.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:19 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1 &mdash; 909.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:2 &mdash; 894, 911.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:2, 3 &mdash; 917.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:3 &mdash; 898.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:6 &mdash; 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:8 &mdash; 454, 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:9 &mdash; 458.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 Peter.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 289, 842.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:4 &mdash; 475, 515, 592, 685, 693, 797, 811.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:10 &mdash; 311, 791, 844.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:11 &mdash; 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:16 &mdash; 157.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19 &mdash; 112.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:19, 20 &mdash; 139.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:21 &mdash; 137, 197, 200, 205, 317, 325, 339.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:1 &mdash; 717, 771.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:4 &mdash; 296, 382, 450, 464, 786.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:4, 9 &mdash; 1024.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:9 &mdash; 1000, 1002.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2 &mdash; 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:3-12 &mdash; 1007.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:4 &mdash; 236.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:5 &mdash; 509, 558.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:7, 10 &mdash; 1011, 1024.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:7, 10, 13 &mdash; 1015.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:7-13 &mdash; 287.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:15, 16 &mdash; 201.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16 &mdash; 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:18 &mdash; 16, 311.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1 John.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1 &mdash; 674.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:5 &mdash; 250, 269, 273, 344.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7 &mdash; 719.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7, 8 &mdash; 645.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:8 &mdash; 573.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:9 &mdash; 289, 739.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:12 &mdash; 856.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:1 &mdash; 322, 339, 739, 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:1, 2 &mdash; 323.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:2 &mdash; 720.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 40.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7, 8 &mdash; 263.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:18 &mdash; 1006.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:20 &mdash; 805, 897.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1, 2 &mdash; 474.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:2 &mdash; 524, 663, 705, 806.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:3 &mdash; 678.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:3-6 &mdash; 263.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:4 &mdash; 552.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:5-7 &mdash; 677.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:8 &mdash; 459.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:9 &mdash; 418.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:14 &mdash; 660, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:16 &mdash; 309.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:20 &mdash; 647, 722.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:1 &mdash; 440.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:2 &mdash; 674, 684, 686.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:7 &mdash; 68, 152, 570.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:7, 8 &mdash; 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:8 &mdash; 250, 263, 336, 520.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:9 &mdash; 716.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:10 &mdash; 720, 776.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:13 &mdash; 844.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:16 &mdash; 797.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:19 &mdash; 694.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:21 &mdash; 460.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1 &mdash; 893.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:4 &mdash; 732.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:6 &mdash; 943.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:7 &mdash; 261, 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:10 &mdash; 200, 844.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:14, 15 &mdash; 848.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:16, 17 &mdash; 650.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:17 &mdash; 553.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:18, 19 &mdash; 450.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:19 &mdash; 574.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:20 &mdash; 260, 308.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 John.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7 &mdash; 686, 1005.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8 &mdash; 293.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3 John.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 &mdash; 483.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jude.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3 &mdash; 42, 200, 202, 905.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4 &mdash; 790.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6 &mdash; 165, 450, 458, 1046.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6, 7 &mdash; 1044.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9 &mdash; 165, 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19 &mdash; 484, 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21 &mdash; 324.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>23 &mdash; 899.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25 &mdash; 275, 388.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>28 &mdash; 1055.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revelation.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1 &mdash; 140.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:3 &mdash; 1007.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:6 &mdash; 776, 917.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:7 &mdash; 460, 710, 1004, 1005.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:8 &mdash; 275, 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:10 &mdash; 410.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:10, 11 &mdash; 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:18 &mdash; 1045.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:20 &mdash; 452.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2: &mdash; 905.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:1 &mdash; 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:6 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:7 &mdash; 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:8 &mdash; 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:11 &mdash; 983.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:12 &mdash; 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:13 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:18 &mdash; 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:21 &mdash; 841.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:1 &mdash; 916, 992.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:7 &mdash; 309, 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:14 &mdash; 310, 916.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:20 &mdash; 464, 791, 839, 1003.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:21 &mdash; 805.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1157'/><anchor id='Pg1157'/>

<lg>
<l>4:3 &mdash; 272.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:6-8 &mdash; 449.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:8 &mdash; 296.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:11 &mdash; 397, 406.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:1, 7, 9 &mdash; 356.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:6 &mdash; 333, 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:9 &mdash; 449.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:10 &mdash; 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:11 &mdash; 447.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:12 &mdash; 140.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:13, 14 &mdash; 311</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5:20 &mdash; 665.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:9 &mdash; 483, 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:9-11 &mdash; 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:10, 11 &mdash; 1002.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:16 &mdash; 350.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7: &mdash; 896.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:16 &mdash; 251.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:16, 17 &mdash; 774.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>8:28, 29 &mdash; 782.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:6 &mdash; 278.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>10:8-11 &mdash; 823.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:11 &mdash; 251.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:17 &mdash; 889.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:9-12 &mdash; 457.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:10 &mdash; 454.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:11 &mdash; 732, 751.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:12 &mdash; 445, 461.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>13:8 &mdash; 266, 285, 298, 762.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:10 &mdash; 464.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:11 &mdash; 660.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14:13 &mdash; 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:1-4 &mdash; 273, 653.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:2 &mdash; 274.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:8 &mdash; 275.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15:13 &mdash; 325.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:3 &mdash; 485.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:5 &mdash; 273, 653.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16:10 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17:17 &mdash; 355.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:13 &mdash; 445, 516.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:2 &mdash; 273, 653.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:5 &mdash; 653.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:7 &mdash; 796.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:9 &mdash; 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:10 &mdash; 842.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:14 &mdash; 448.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19:15, 16 &mdash; 775.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:1-5 &mdash; 403, 1015.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:2 &mdash; 382, 455.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:2, 3 &mdash; 425.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:2-10 &mdash; 445.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:4-6 &mdash; 1008.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:6 &mdash; 805.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:10 &mdash; 382, 457, 464.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:11-15 &mdash; 1011.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:12 &mdash; 1023.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:12, 13 &mdash; 1023, 1050.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:13 &mdash; 1015.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:14 &mdash; 983, 999.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20:15 &mdash; 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:4, 5 &mdash; 1018.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:5 &mdash; 209, 810, 1004.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:8 &mdash; 983, 1048.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:9 &mdash; 1048.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:10 &mdash; 310.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:11 &mdash; 1049.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:14 &mdash; 909.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:17 &mdash; 781.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:22 &mdash; 893.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:23 &mdash; 256, 712.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:2 &mdash; 914.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>21:27 &mdash; 790.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:4 &mdash; 67.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:6 &mdash; 200, 465.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:8, 9 &mdash; 319, 453, 515.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:9 &mdash; 446.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:11 &mdash; 851, 852, 1001, 1048.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:12, 20 &mdash; 1007.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:13, 14 &mdash; 326.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:14 &mdash; 527.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:16 &mdash; 680, 697.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>22:17 &mdash; 392, 547, 796.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='1158'/><anchor id='Pg1158'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index Of Apocryphal Texts.</head>

<lg>
<l>1 Esdras.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:28 &mdash; 166.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:38 &mdash; 261.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:35-38 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:1 &mdash; 261.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 Esdras.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:7 &mdash; 626.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3:21 &mdash; 626.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:55, 66 &mdash; 156.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:11 &mdash; 626.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:46 &mdash; 626.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:48 &mdash; 626.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:118 &mdash; 626.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:19 &mdash; 626.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tobit.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4:15 &mdash; 181.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judith.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:71 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esther, Continuation of.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1:1 &mdash; 309.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wisdom.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:23, 24 &mdash; 626.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:26 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:28 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>9:9, 10 &mdash; 320.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:16 &mdash; 633.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>11:17 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecclesiasticus, or Sirach.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prologue &mdash; 166.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:1 &mdash; 870.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:30 &mdash; 865.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18:1 &mdash; 446.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>24:23-27 &mdash; 166.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>25:24 &mdash; 626.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>31:25 &mdash; 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>48:24 &mdash; 166.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baruch.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:21 &mdash; 166.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bel and the Dragon.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of &mdash; 115.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1 Maccabees.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of &mdash; 165, 309.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:9 &mdash; 166.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 Maccabees.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2:13-15 &mdash; 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>6:23 &mdash; 166.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7:28 &mdash; 377.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>12:39 &mdash; 1043.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of Enoch.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>165.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assumption of Moses.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of &mdash; 165.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>v. 9 &mdash; 658.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='1159'/><anchor id='Pg1159'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index Of Greek Words.</head>

<lg>
<l>ἄ οἶδεν, 67</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀγαθῆς, 821</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀγαθόν, 562, 687</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀγαπάω,  264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀγάπη, 35, 342</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀγάπην, τὴν, 1 John 3:16, = the personal Love, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀγγέλους, 706</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀγιάζω, 728</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀγνωσίαν Θεοῦ τινες ἔχουσιν, 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀγῶνα, 870</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀγωνίζου, 870</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἄγραφος νόμος, 541</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀδικία, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἄθεοι ἐν ῷ κόσμῳ, forsaken of God, 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀθεράπευτον, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἄιδης, 994</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀΐδιος, 1044, 1046</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αἵματι, 753</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αἱρετικὸς ἄνθρωπος, meaning in Titus 3:10, 974</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αἴρων, its meaning in John 1:29, 719</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αἴσθησις, spiritual discernment, Phil. 1:9, 440</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αἰῶν, 1038, 1044, 1045, 1046</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αἰῶνα, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αἰώνιος, 1038, 1044, 1045, 1046</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αἰώνος, 1025</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αἰώνων, πρὸ τῶν, 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀλήθεια, 204, 549</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀληθής, the Veracious, 260</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀληθινός, 1 John 5:20, 151, 260, 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἄλλο καὶ ἄλλο and the εἶς, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἄλλος καὶ ἄλλος and the συνάφεια, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἁμαρτάνειν, Rom. 5:12, 19, 626</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἁμαρτάνουσιν, 626</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἁμαρτία, 552, 657, 706, 714, 761, 832, 851</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἁμαρτωλοὶ κατεστάθησαν, 627</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἁμαρτωλὸν γίγνεσθαι, 626</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀμνος, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀνά, 523</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀναβαίνων, 935</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀνακεφαλαιώσασθαι, 680</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀναλῦσαι, 999</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀνάστασιν μέλλειν, ἔσεσθαι, 998</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀνδρός, 494</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀνέβησαν, 935</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀνήρ, 666</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀνθρωπίνης σοφίας, 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἄνθρωπος, 506, 523, 974</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀνομία, the state of, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀντάλλαγμα, 717, 721</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀντί, 717, 720</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀντίληψεις, 902, 917, 918</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀντίλυτρον, 717</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀνυποστασία, 673, 679</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἄνω, 523</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπ᾽ ἄρτι, 1003</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἅπαξ, once for all, 200, 885, 967</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἅπαξ λεγόμενον, 222</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπαύγασμα, 336</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπεθάνετε, 803</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπειθήσασιν, 1 Pet. 3:20, 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπηλάθην, 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπηλγηκότες, 647</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἁπλῶς ἔν, τό, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπό, 833, 1034</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπὸ ὁ ὦν, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀποκαλύπτεται, 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀποκάλυψις, 13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπομνημονεύματα, 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀποδώσει, ἀποδώη, 231</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀποθανῶν, 851</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀποστασία, 552, 1008</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀποστρέφω, 829</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀποτέλεσμα, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>genus apotelesmaticum</foreign>, 686</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπρόσληπτον καὶ ἀθεράπευτον, τὸ, a patristic dictum, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπώλεια, 721, 993</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀπώλετο, 993</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀρνίον, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἅρτι, 1003</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀρτολατρία, 969</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀρχάγγελος, 320</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀρχή, 310, 675</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀρχῇ, ἐν, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀρχήν, 450</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀρχιερεύς, 320</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀσέβεια, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀττικίζων, 665</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αὐτομάτη, 393</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αὐτός, 310</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αὐτῷ, 837</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>αὐτῶν, 906</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀφανίζω, 993</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἀφορίσατε, 906</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>βαπτίζω, 933, 934, 935, 937, 938, 942, 948</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1160'/><anchor id='Pg1160'/>

<lg>
<l>βάπτισμα, 933</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>βαπτισμός, 937</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>βάπτω, 933, 934, 938</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>βάρβαροι, 579</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>βασάνοις, ἐν, 999</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>βασιλευόντων, 445</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>βασιλεὺς τῶν αἰώνων, 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>βδέλυγμα τῆς ἐρημώσεως, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>βουλή, arbitrium, Willkür, 557</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>βραχύ τι, its translation in Heb. 2:7, 706</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γέγονεν, 311</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γέγραπται, 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γενησόμενον, 1019</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γενήσονται, 914</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γενόμενος, 705</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γένος, 681</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γῆ, 393</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γῆς ἐμῆς ἀπηλάθην, 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γιγνώσκωσιν, 841</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γινώσκεσθαι, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γινώσκω, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γνόντα, 761</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γνώμη, 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γνῶσις, 1 Tim. 6:20; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> ἐπιγνωσις, 2 Pet. 1:2, 31, 841</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γνωστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ, 26, 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γραφή, ἡ, singular denotes unity, 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δαίμων, 506</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δεδικαίωμαι, δεδικαίωται, 851</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δεύτερος θεός, applied by Philo to his Logos, 320</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δεξάμενοι, 1 Thess. 1:6, 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διὰ πίστιν, justification not, but διὰ πίστεως or ἐκ πίστεως, 864</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διὰ τὸ ἐνοικοῦν and διὰ τοῦ ἐνοικοῦντος, Rom. 8:11, 488, 1017</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διὰ τοῦτο, Rom. 5:12, 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διαθήκην, 614</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διακονεῖν τραπέζαις, 918</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διακονία, 902, 917</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διάκονος, 902</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διάβολος, 454</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διδακτικόν, 915</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διδακτοῖς, 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διδάσκαλος, 902</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διῆλθεν, 623</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δίκαιοι κατασταθήσονται, 627</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δίκαιος, 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δικαιοσύνη, 852, 853</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δικαιοσύνη Θεοῦ, that required and provided for by God, 847, 852, 853</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δικαιοσύνην ποιησάτω, 851</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δικαιοσύνην, τὴν ἰδίαν, repudiated by Paul, 852</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δικαιοσύνη πίστεως, or ἐκ πίστεως, 852</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δικαιοσύνης, 753</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δικαιόω, 850, 851, 853</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δικαιωθέντης, 856</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δικαίωμα, 852</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δικαίωσις, 852, 853</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δίχα, 483</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>διψᾷν, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δοκῶ, 242, 670</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δόξης, 307, 336</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δουλεύω, 576</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δοῦλοι, 579</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δράκοντα, τόν, ὁ ὄφις, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δυνάμεις, 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>δύο, 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἑαυτόν, LXX, for Hebrew <q>his soul,</q>, 485</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἑαυτούς, 780</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐγγύς, Phil. 4:5, 1006</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐγένετο, 687</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἔγνων, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἶδον ὄχλος πολύς, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἰκών, 335</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἶναι, τὸ, 377, 753</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἶπεν αὐτῷ, 306</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἶς, 313, 627, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἰς, 935, 948</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἰς and ἐπί, Rom. 3:22, 722</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἰς αὐτόν, 837</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἰς ὄνομα, 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἰς σέ, 924</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἰς τὸ ὄνομα, 951</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἰς τὸν κόλπον, John 1:18, 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐκ, 833, 891</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἐκδοσις ἀκριβὴς τῆς ὀρθοδόξου πίστεως, earliest work on Systematic Theology, 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐκείνος, applied to the Holy Spirit, 323</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐκένωσεν, Phil. 2:7, 701</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐκήρυξεν, 707</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐκκλησία, 890, 891, 892, 905, 906, 912</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐκκλησίαν, 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐλευθερίας, 549</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐληλυθότα, 687</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐλλογᾶται, 594</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἕν, 313, 352</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐν, its force with βαπτίζω, 935</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐν ἀρχῇ, John 1:1, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα, 687</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἔνδειξις, Rom. 3:25, 753</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐνοικοῦν, ἐνοικοῦντος, 488, 1017</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐνυποστασία, 679</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἕνωσις, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἕνωσις ὑποστατική, 673</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐξ ἀμόρφου ὕλης, 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐξακολευθέω, 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐξηγήσατο, 349</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐξιλάσομαι, 729, 737</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐξ οὐκ ὅντων, ex nihilo, 2 Maccabees 7:28, 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐξουσίαν, John 1:12, 825</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ, 873</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπενδύσασθαι, 2 Cor. 5:2, 4, 235, 998</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπερώτημα, 821</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπί, 772, 833</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπίγνωσις, 2 Pet. 1:12; cf. γνῶσις, 1 Tim. 6:20, 31, ἐπίγνωσις ἁμαρτίας, 832</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπιθυμία, state, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπίσκοπος, 897, 902, 914, 915</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπισκοποῦντες, 914, 915</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπιστρέφω, 829</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπιταγὴ κυρίου, 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπιφάνεια, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐπιχορηγήσατε, 871</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἔργα, 117</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1161'/><anchor id='Pg1161'/>

<lg>
<l>ἔργον τοῦ Θεού, 847</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἔρχεται ὢρα, John 5:28-30, 998</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐσκήνωσεν, John 1:14, 234, 687</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐστίν, 310, 562, 687</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐτέθην, 919</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εὐλογητός, Rom. 9:5, 306</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εὐρεθείς, Phil. 2:8, 705</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐφ᾽ ᾧ, Rom. 5:12, 39, 626</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐφανερώθη, 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐφθάρη, Gen. 6:11, LXX, 993</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἔχθρα, state, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐχθροί, 719</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ζιζάνια, 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ζωή, 311, 626, 1045</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ζωογονοῦντος τὰ πάντα, 412, 883</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἡγούμενοι, 897</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἦθος ἀνθρώπῳ δαίμων, 506</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἠλάττωσας, 106</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἥμαρτον, 610, 622, 623, 625, 626</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἤν, 309, 310</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἠρεμία, rest, summit of Aristotle's <q>slope</q>, 580</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θάνατος, 626</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θανατωθείς, 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θεῖα, 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θεῖον, 57, 681</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θεῖος ἀνήρ, 666</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θέλημα, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas</foreign>, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Wille</foreign>, 557</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θεόπνευστος, 197, 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θεός, 57, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 321, 342, 517</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θεοῦ, 731, 781  847</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θηρίον, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θρήσκεια, 24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θρόνος, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>θυσία, 728</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἱερώτατος, 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἱλάσκομαι, 728</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἱλασμός, 728</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἱλαστήριον, 753</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἰορδάνην, 935</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἰσαάκ, 517</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>καθαίρω, 728</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>καθορᾶται, 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>καιρῶ, 753</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κακία, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>καλέω, 891, 896</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>καλόν, 870</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κανών, 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>καρποφορεῖ, 393</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κατ᾽ οἶκον, Acts 2:46, 960, 961</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>καταβολῆς κόσμου, πρό, 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κατάρα, 761</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κατασταθήσονται, 627</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κατεστάθησαν, 627</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κατέβησαν, 935</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κατηρτισμένα, Rom. 9:23, 780</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κεντυρίων, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κηρύσσειν, 1 Pet. 3:18-20, 707</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κλῆρος, 911</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κοινωνία, 1 Cor. 10:16, 17; 1 John 1:3, 796, 807, 965</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κολαζομένους, 2 Pet. 2:9, 1000</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κόλασις, Mat. 25:46; 1 John 4:18, 1036</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κόλπῳ, 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κόσμος, 563</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κόσμος νοητός, 320</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κόσμου, 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κτίσεως, 341</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κτίσις, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>creatura</foreign>, 392</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κτίστης, οὐ τεχνίτης, 388</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κυβερνήσεις, 1 Cor. 12:28, 902, 917</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κυριακή, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kirche</foreign>, kirk, church, 891</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κυριευόντων, 445</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κύριος, 306, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>κυρίου, 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυρίου Πνεύματος, 2 Cor. 3:18, 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λαβών, Phil. 2:7, 705</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λελουμένοι, 936</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λόγια, 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Λογίων κυριακῶν ἐξήγησις, 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λογισθείη, 594</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λόγος, 2, 305, 306, 321, 335, 342, 549, 665, 687, 700</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Λόγος κατηχητικὸς ὁ μέγας, by Gregory of Nyssa, 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λόγος σπερματικός, 665</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λόγος σοφίας, 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λόγος τέλειος, 549</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λόγου Θείου τινός, 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λούω, 936</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λύπη κατὰ Θεόν, 832</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λύπη τοῦ κόσμου, 832</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>λύτρον, 717, 720, 721</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μέγας θεός, ὁ, 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μεσίτης, 710</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μεταβολή, 672</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μεταμέλεια, 833</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μεταμέλομαι, 832</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μετάνοια, 833</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μὴ γνόντα ἁμαρτίαν, 761</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μὴ ὄντος, 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μόνη ἀρχή, 327</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μονογενής, 336</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μονογενής Θεός, variant in John 1:18, 306, 341</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μορφῇ Θεοῦ, Phil. 2:6, 705</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μορφὴν δούλου, 705</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μύθοις, 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μυστήριον, 691</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>μύω, 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Μωσῆς ἀττικίζων, 665</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>νεανίσκοι, 918</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>νεκροῦ, 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>νέμω, 533</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>νεώτεροι, 918</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>νόμος, 533, 541</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>νόμος τέλειος, Jas. 1:25, 549</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>νοσῶν, 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>νοούμενα, Rom. 1:19-21, 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>νοῦς, 33, 68, 352, 394, 670, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>νῦν ἐστίν, 998</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὁ, in John 1:1 and 4:24, 305</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὁδηγεῖν, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οἱ πάντες, 2 Cor. 5:14, 623</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οἱ πολλοί, Rom. 5:19, 627</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οἶδεν, 67</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οἰκεῖ, 562</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οἰκία, 961</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1162'/><anchor id='Pg1162'/>

<lg>
<l>οἶκος, 960, 961</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὁμοιούσιον and ὁμοούσιον, 329, 336, 700</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὁμοιώματι σαρκὸς ἁμαρτίας, ἐν, 706</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὁμοίως, 626</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὅν τρόπον, Acts 1:11, 1004</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὄνομα, 951</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὀργή, Rom. 1:18, 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὁρισθέντος, 341</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὀρθῶς προσενέγκῃς, Gen. 4:7, 727</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὅτι οἶδεν, 67</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οὐ τάξει, 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οὐδὲν ἐμαυτῷ σύνοιδα, 851</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οὐδέποτε, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οὐρανός, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οὐρανῷ, 681, 686, 697</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οὐσία, 333, 578, 673</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>οὔτως, Rom. 5:12, 626</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>παῖς, 697</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πᾶν, τό, 102, 392</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πάντα, τά, 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πάντα δι᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο, 311</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πάντας, 772</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πάντες ἥμαρτον, Rom. 5:12, 622, 623, 626</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>παρά, 337, 341</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>παραβαίνων, 614</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>παραθήκην, 149, 882</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>παρακαλῶ, 914</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>παράκλητος, 323, 339, 710</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>παρακοή, Rom. 5:19, 627</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πάρεσις, 753</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>παρρησία, 808</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πατήρ, 448</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πατριά, 334, 448</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πεινόν, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πεπίστευκας, 306</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>περί, 210, 714, 833</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Περὶ Ἀρχῶν, of Origen, 44, 489</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Περὶ τοῦ Πυθαγορικοῦ βίου, of Iamblicus, 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>περιπατεῖν, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>περιχώρησις, 333</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Πέτρῳ, 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πεφυκός, 580</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πιστεύοντας, 772</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πιστεύω, 838</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πίστεως, 753, 847, 864, 870</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πίστις, 838, 851</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πλήρωμα, 348, 796</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πνεῦμα, 213, 323, 483-488, 490, 491, 562, 670, 671, 686, 687, 688, 707, 1017</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πνεύματι, 708</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πνευματικόν, 1017</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πνεύματος, 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ποιεῖν, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ποιήμασιν, τοῖς, 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ποιμαίνειν, 151, 914</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ποιμάνατε, 914</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ποιμένας, 902</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ποιμήν, εἶς, 914</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ποίμνη, μία, 914</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ποίμνιον, 964</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ποίνη, 652</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πόλις, 337, 900</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πολλοί, 627</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πολλούς, 627</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πολλῶν, 717, 720</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πολυμερῶς, 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πολυτροπῶς, 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πονηρία, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πρασιαὶ πρασιαί, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πρεσβύτερος, 914, 915</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>προγινώσκω, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>προέγνω, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>προέθετο, 753</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>προῖστάμενος, 897, 902</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πρός, John 1:1, 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>προσενέγκης, 727</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>προσενεχθείς, 967</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>προστάτης, 897</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>προσφορά, 728</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πρόσωπον, 333, 673</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>προφήτης, 710</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>πρωτότοκος, 341</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ῥαντίσωνται, variant in Mark 7:4, 934</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ῥαντισμός, 937</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σάρκα, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σαρκί, 562, 687</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σαρκός, 687, 706</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σάρξ, 552, 562, 563, 687</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σέ, 924</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σεσοφισμένοις, 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σημεῖον, 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σκηνοῦν ἐν, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σοφίζειν, 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σπεκουλάτωρ, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σπερματικός, 665</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σπερμάτων, 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σύγχυσις, 672</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συμβάλλειν, 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συμπάσκομεν, 803</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συμπεφυκώς, 941</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συμπρεσβύτερος, 914</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σύμφυτος, 796, 941</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συμφωνήθη, συμφωνήσωσιν, 927</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σὺν Χριστῷ εἶναι, 999</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συνάφεια, 671</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συνδοξασθῶμεν, 803</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συνεζωοποίησεν, 803</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συνειδήσεως ἀγαθῆς ἐπερώτημα, 821</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συνεσταύρωμαι, 803</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συνετάφημεν, 803</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συνηγέρθητε, 803</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>συντέλεια, Mat. 13:39, 1025</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σχολή, 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σῶμα, 484, 487, 671, 1019</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σώματος τοῦ Χριστοῦ, 965</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σῶσαι and σωθῆναι, 791</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σωτῆρος ἡμῶν, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>σώφρων, 1 Tim. 3:2, 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τάξει, 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τάσσω, 780</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τέλειος, 879</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τέλος, 675</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τέμνω, 483, 484</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τέρατα, 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τεταγμένοι, Acts 13:43, 780</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τετραχηλισμένα, 283</l>
</lg>

<pb n='1163'/><anchor id='Pg1163'/>

<lg>
<l>τεχνίτης, 388</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τιμή, 717</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τὸ γνωστὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ, 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τὸ δὲ καθ᾽ εἶς, τὸ δὲ καθ᾽ ἕνα, 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τοῦ διδόντος Θεοῦ, 265, 440</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τοῦτο, 781</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τραπέζαις, 918</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τρίχα, 484</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>τρόπον, 1005</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὕβρις, 569</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὑγιής, 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὕδατα, ὕδατος, 935</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὕδωρ, 935</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>υἱον, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>υἱσθεσία, 335</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὔλη, 321, 378, 700</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὑπακοή, 627</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὑπακοή πίστεως, 847</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὑπέρ, 210, 710</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὑπέρ and ἀντί, 717</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὑπερβάλλουσα τῆς γνώσεως, 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὑποστάσεως, 336</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὑπόστασις, 333, 673</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὑποσταστική, 673</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὕστερον Πέτρω, 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὑστεροῦνται, 623</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>φανέρωσις, Rom. 1:19, 20, 13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>φερόμενοι, 2 Pet. 1:21, 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>φθείρω, 993</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>φιλέω, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>φυλακῇ, ἐν, 999</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>φύσις, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>natura</foreign>, 392, 579</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>χαρακτήρ, Heb. 1:3, 336</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>χάριν ἀντὶ χάριτος, 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>χάρις and ὀργή, 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>χειροτονήσαντες, 906, 907</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Χριστός, 1016</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Χριστοῦ, 965</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>χρόνος and αἰών, 1045</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>χωρίς, 311, 731</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ψυχαί, 485</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ψυχή, 352, 385, 483-487, 490, 491, 671, 717, 1017</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ψυχικοί, 485</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ψυχικόν, 1017</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὤν, 349, 681, 686, 697</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὤρα, 998</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὡρισμένος, Acts 10:42, 780</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὡς ἄνθρωπος, 614</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ὥψ, 523</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='1164'/><anchor id='Pg1164'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index Of Hebrew Words.</head>

<lg>
<l>א, Codex Sinaiticus, 306, 308, 449, 681, 686, 697, 851, 891, 915, 934.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>אניון, <q>poor,</q> whence term <q>Ebionite,</q>, 669</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>אדם, Hos. 6:7, כאדם, ὡς ἄνθρωπος LXX, <q>like men that break a covenant,</q>, 614</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>אדני, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>אהיה, Exod. 3:14, I am, 252, 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>אל, a singular noun, might have been used instead of אלהים, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>אלה, to fear, to adore, root of אלהים, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>אלהים, 318</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed with singular verb, 318</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>applied to Son, 318</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pluralis majestaticus</foreign>, 318</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>according to Oehler, <q>a quantitative plural,</q>, 318</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its derivation, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ברא, implies production of effect without natural antecedent, 375</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Kal used only of God, 375</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>never has accusative of material, 375</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used, in Gen. 1 and 2, to mark introduction of world of matter, life, and spirit, 374</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from words signifying <q>to make</q> and <q>to form,</q>, 375</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Gen. 1:2, must mean <q>calling into being,</q>, 375</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the original signification <q>to cut,</q> though retained in Piel, does not militate against a more spiritual sense in other species, 376</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the only word for absolute creation in Hebrew, 376</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the meaning <q>creation by law</q> suggested, 392</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>רמות, <q>the likeness of God,</q> according to Moehler: <q>the pious exercise of צלם, the religious faculty,</q>, 522</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>according to Romanist theologians, a product of man's obedience, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a synonym of צלם, 521</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>זרע, <q>seed,</q> Gen. 22:18, referred to in Gal. 3:16, 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>חטא, ἁμαρτάνω, Hiphil, to make a miss, Judges 20:16, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>חטאה, ἁμαρτία, missing, failure, applicable not merely to act but likewise to state, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>יהוה, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>יום, <q>day,</q> Gen. 1, 35</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its hyperliteral interpretation, 394</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>often used for a period of indefinite duration, 394</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theory that <q>six days</q> indicates series merely, 395</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a scheme harmonizing the Mosaic <q>six days</q> creation with the order of the geologic record, 393-397</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>יצר, 375</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>כרובים, Ez. 1, Ex. 37:6-9, Gen. 3:24, 449</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to be identified with the <q>seraphim</q> and <q>the living creatures,</q>, 449</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>are temporary symbolic figures, 449</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>symbols of human nature spiritualized and sanctified, 449</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exalted to be the dwelling-place of God, 449</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>symbols of mercy, 449</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>angels and cherubim never together, 449</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in closing visions of Revelation no longer seen, 449</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some regard them as symbols of divine government, 449</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>list of authorities on, 449</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>כתיב, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>מלאף יהוה, identifies himself with Jehovah, 319</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is so identified by others, 319</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accepts divine worship, 319</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with perhaps single exception in O. T., designates pre-incarnate Logos, 319</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>עון, ἀδικία LXX, bending, perverseness, iniquity, referring to state as well as act, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>עשה, 375</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>פקר, judicial visitation, punishment, 657</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>פשע, ἀσέβεια LXX, separation from, rebellion, indicative of state as well as act, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>צלם, Gen. 1:26, according to Moehler, <q>the religious faculty,</q>, 522</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>according to Bellarmine, <q>ipsa natura mentis et voluntatis</q>, 522</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>according to Scholastic and Romanist theologians, alone belonged to man's nature at its creation, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>required addition of supernatural grace that it might possess original righteousness, 520</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a synonym of דמות, 521</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>צדק, Hiphil form in Dan. 12:3, best rendered <q>they that justify many,</q>, 850</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>קהל, its meaning in O. T. and Targums, 892</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps used by Christ in Mat. 18:17, 892</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how it differs from ἐκκλησία, 892</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>קרי, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>רע, bad, evil, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>רשע, a wicked person, 552</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>שאל, an alleged root of Sheol, 994</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>שעל, a probable root of Sheol, 994</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>של, 994</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>שאול, its derivation, 994</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its root-meaning, 994</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the soul is still conscious in, 994</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>God can recover men from, 994</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>שרפים, Is. 6:2, to be identified with the <q>cherubim</q> of Genesis, Exodus and Ezekiel, and with <q>the living creatures</q> of Revelation, 449</l>
</lg>

</div>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
